Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  2 Conditions and Terms of Use  
Copyright © Heritage History 201 0 
Some rights reserved   
This text was produced and distributed by Heritage History, an 
organization dedicated to the preservation of classical juvenile history 
books, and to the promotion of the works of traditional history authors.  
The books which Herita ge History republishes are in the public 
domain and are no longer protected by the original copyright. They may 
therefore be reproduced within the United States without paying a royalty 
to the author.  
The text and pictures used to produce this version of the work, 
however, are the property of Heritage History and are subject to certain 
restrictions. These restrictions are imposed for the purpose of protecting the 
integrity of the work, for preventing plagiarism, and for helping to assure 
that compromised v ersions of the work are not widely disseminated.  
In order to preserve information regarding the origin of this text, a 
copyright by the author, and a Heritage History distribution date are 
included at the foot of every page of text. We req uire all electro nic and 
printed versions of this text include these markings and that users adhere to 
the following restrictions.  
1. You may reproduce this  text for personal or educational purposes as   
long as the copyright and Heritage History version are included . 
   
2. You may not alter this text or try to pass off all or any part of it as your 
own work.  
   
3. You may not distribute copies of this text for commercial purposes .  
   
4. This text is intended to be a faithful and complete copy of the original 
document. However, typos , omissions, and other errors may have 
occurred during preparation, and Heritage History does not guarantee a 
perfectly reliable reproduction.  
Permission to use Heritage History documents or images for 
commercial purposes, or more information about our co llection of 
traditional history resources can be obtained by contacting us at 
Infodesk@heritage -history.com  
 FOREWORD  
There is no more marvellous story in human history 
than that of Napoleon I., Emperor of the French. His career is 
one long demonstration of the reality of the proverb, "Truth is 
stranger than fiction." So fascinating are the details of a life in 
which so much was attempted and accomplished that many 
thousands of volumes have been published dealing with its 
various phases. The demand is by n o means exhausted, the 
supply continuous, as witness the present work. Busy pens are 
still employed in reviewing the almost superhuman activities 
of the once obscure Corsican, whose genius for war and 
conquest upset many a throne, secured for him the 
Overl ordship of Europe, and eventually consigned him to an 
island prison. Indeed, there seems little likelihood of a lull in 
interest while the chief source of instruction and amusement of 
human nature is humanity —in other words itself. Most of us 
are content t o be pupils in the school of experience, willing to 
sit at the feet of such a master as Napoleon, and learn the 
lessons he has to teach. The result cannot be other than 
profitable.  
Napoleon has now been dead for a century, but the 
dazzling brilliancy of h is exploits has left a rich afterglow 
which enables us to get a much less distorted view of him than 
did our forefathers who were his contemporaries. A subdued 
light is more useful than one so strong that it almost blinds. 
With the former we can see detail s more distinctly, note faults 
and flaws if there be any, get a clearer idea of an object in 
every way. Within living memory the name of Napoleon, 
particularly in Great Britain, was associated with everything 
that was base and vile, now we know that he was  neither the 
Borgia of his enemies nor the Arch -Patriot of his friends. 
Nevertheless it is easier for a sightless person to thread a 
needle than for the most conscientious historian to arrive at an 
absolutely just summing -up of the case. The "Memoirs" of 
those with whom the Emperor was intimately acquainted are 
seldom impartial; the majority of the writers are either 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  3 definitely for or against him. Take those of Baron Meneval as 
a typical example. The author was one of Napoleon's 
secretaries, and every page of his work is a defence of his 
master. In the matter of the execution of the Duc d'Enghien, 
for instance, he takes up the cudgels on behalf of the man who 
was responsible for the tragedy at Vincennes, boldly stating 
that "One is forced to admit that Napol eon fulfilled a painful 
duty, as Head of the Government, and that instead of charging 
him with a crime, one should rather pity him for having been 
placed in the necessity of accepting all the odium of an act, the 
deplorable consequences of which, in the fu ture, his foresight 
only too clearly pointed out to him."  
Far from Napoleon being concerned as to probable 
political consequences, he asserted it would teach the 
Bourbons a lesson. On the other hand, the "Memoirs" of 
Barras, a prominent figure in the Fren ch Revolution, might 
have been of considerable service to us in gathering 
information as to Bonaparte's early career, had it not been 
proved beyond question that much he tells us is sheer 
barefaced untruth, and he everywhere seeks to belittle the 
accomplis hments of the young soldier.  
"Bonaparte, on the 13th of Vendemiaire," he says, 
"performed no functions but those of an aide -de-camp of mine. 
I was on horseback, he was on foot; he could not follow my 
movements. The only order he received from me was to go  to 
the Pont Royal, and to report to me what was taking place. He 
did not give, and had not to give, a single order, and was seen 
at only one point of the attack, at the Carrousel. He did not stir 
from thence; Brune was in command." The statements of 
Thieb ault, Marmont, and many others prove beyond question 
that Napoleon, and he alone, saved the day.  
Books which unduly eulogise or condemn should be 
read therefore with a certain amount of reserve. Of partisans 
such as Jung there are many, and they doubtless  fulfil a useful 
purpose provided always that a representative of the other side 
is given a similar hearing. Lanfrey, whose vitriolic volumes may be perused in English, represents a school of thought 
which has no place in an age which refuses to listen or to read 
only of the evil in a man. Special attention has been paid in the 
present work to the genesis of Napoleon's career, because it is 
in what is known as the formative period that we plant the 
seeds of future success. To -day and to -morrow are inextrica bly 
interblended, although we so often fail to appreciate what is 
assuredly one of the most vital facts of life. Periods of time are 
no more real boundaries than periods of history, which are 
merely make -believe divisions for purposes of clearness and 
reference. Of course, one reign may be more enlightened than 
another, one Statesman may confer more benefits on his 
country than his predecessor, but there is always a previous 
foundation on which to build. Napoleon did not create his vast 
Empire from nothing.  A mosaic -worker who is given a pile of 
vari-coloured marble chips with which to glorify a cathedral 
pavement does not disdain the fragments because they are in 
confusion and appear of little worth. With infinite patience and 
skill he sorts them into their  various grades, then combines 
them again, but giving each its proper order in the scheme. 
Presently from apparent chaos he produces a work of beauty.  
Napoleon came on the scene when the giant upheaval 
known as the French Revolution had thrown the whole n ation 
out of gear. He brought the scattered masses together, 
recreated Government and the army, made laws, re -established 
religion—in a word, led the people back from anarchy and 
savagery to civilisation and order. Napoleon's true place in 
history is as an  organiser. Conqueror he undoubtedly was, and 
his overgrown ambition in this direction was the cause of his 
downfall. Had he chosen to rule France solely all would have 
been well; neighbouring nations could not have raised 
legitimate objections. As it was they owe a debt of gratitude to 
him. Although no part of his scheme to awaken dormant ideals 
of nationality and of liberty, he unwittingly did so in the 
archaic Holy Roman Empire, Italy, Spain, and Tyrol, to 
mention the more important. A century ago, Europ e hated the 
Man of Destiny, and not without cause; to -day, she has every 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  4 reason, if not to revere his memory, to be thankful for having 
felt the iron grip of Napoleon. Surgical operations are 
extremely painful whether individual or national.  
Napoleon cann ot be called a "good" man in the usually 
accepted sense of so latitudinarian a word. He was the 
instigator of more than one political crime, yet he had a heart 
that could beat for the afflicted; he would say the most unkind 
and cruel things of Sir Hudson L owe, to whose care he was 
committed at St Helena, and play at bears with little Betsy 
Balcombe during her stay in the same island. So complex a 
personality must necessarily defy to a great extent the set -
square and compasses both of panegyrist and detracto r. 
Guided by no standard code of morality, he created his own, 
that of expediency. "No name," says Lord Rosebery, 
"represents so completely and conspicuously dominion, 
splendour and catastrophe. He raised himself by the use, and 
ruined himself by the abuse , of superhuman faculties. He was 
wrecked by the extravagance of his own genius. No less 
powers than those which had effected his rise could have 
achieved his fall."  
In a book limited to a certain number of pages many 
phases of a crowded life such as Napo leon's must necessarily 
receive somewhat scant treatment It has been found 
impossible to treat military events in full, but the general 
outlines of the various campaigns have been given, and the 
narratives of first -hand authorities quoted whenever 
practica ble. For general reading a description of a battle by a 
man who was present is always to be preferred to the minute 
details of the most painstaking student. As regards authorities, 
special reference must be made to Volume IX. of the 
monumental Cambridge Mo dern History , Dr J. Holland Rose's 
just and impartial Life of Napoleon I. , Sir John Seeley's 
somewhat disparaging Short History of Napoleon the First , Mr 
F. Loraine Petre's masterly studies of the Polish, Prussian, and 
Austrian campaigns, Sir Archibald Ali son's History of Europe , 
which has by no means lost its usefulness since more modern research has added to our knowledge of the epoch, Mr Oscar 
Browning's interesting Boyhood and Youth of Napoleon, 1769 -
1793 , and Mr Hereford B. George's Napoleon's Invasion  of 
Russia . A host of other volumes dealing with the same 
inexhaustible subject which line the shelves of my crowded 
library have also been utilised, I trust, to good purpose.  
It may not be considered inappropriate that a new 
edition of this book should b e called for in the year of the 
centenary of the death of the great soldier and statesman. Since 
the work was first published in 1910 as a monograph for the 
general reader, it has been reprinted many times, which is 
additional testimony to the continued in terest in Napoleon, 
whose name is perhaps venerated most of all by Marshal Foch, 
the outstanding military genius of the World War. I have taken 
the opportunity to include a new chapter. When the late 
Admiral Eden was a senior midshipman he was told by his 
Admiral that he was to accompany him on a visit to the fallen 
Emperor at St Helena. "We waited for Napoleon in an outer 
room," he afterwards told a friend, "and you must imagine 
how eagerly I expected his entrance. The door was thrown 
open at last, and in he came. He was short and fat, and nothing 
very attractive but for his eye! My word, sir, I had never seen 
anything like it.  
"After speaking to the Admiral he turned to me, and 
then I understood for the first time in my life what was the 
meaning of the ph rase 'A born ruler of men.' I had been taught 
to hate the French as I hated the devil; but when Napoleon 
looked at me there was such power and majesty in his look 
that if he had bade me lie down that he might walk over me, I 
would have done it at once, Eng lishman although I was. The 
look on Napoleon's face was the revelation of the man and the 
explanation of his power. He was born to command."  
And there you have part of the secret of Napoleon's 
career.  
 
HAROLD  F. B. W HEELER .  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  5  
 
 
 
 
 
NAPOLEON  I., E MPEROR  OF THE FRENCH .  
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
NAPOLEON THE BOY ................................ ................................ .........  6 
THE SCHOOLDAYS OF NAPOLEON  ................................ ....................  8 
NAPOLEON AS OFFICER AND AUTHOR  ................................ ...........  12 
NAPOLEON AND THE CORSICAN VOLUNTEERS  ..............................  17 
THE EVE OF THE REIGN OF TERROR  ................................ ..............  20 
NAPOLEON 'S FIRST FIGHT WITH THE ENGLISH  .............................  24 
NAPOLEON THE SOLDIER OF FORTUNE  ................................ ..........  27 
"THE SPARK OF GREAT AMBITION " ................................ ..............  32 
THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGN  ................................ ................................  35 
THE EXPEDITION TO EGYPT  ................................ ...........................  39 
FROM CAIRO TO FREJUS  ................................ ................................  42 
HOW NAPOLEON SEIZED THE REINS OF GOVERNMENT  ................  45 
THE PASSAGE OF THE ALPS ................................ ............................  48 
BLESSINGS OF PEACE  ................................ ................................ ...... 54 
THE DAWN OF THE EMPIRE  ................................ ............................  57 
THE THREATENED INVASION OF ENGLAND AND ITS SEQUEL  ....... 61 
THE WAR OF THE THIRD COALITION  ................................ ............  64 
THE PRUSSIAN CAMPAIGN  ................................ ..............................  69 
THE POLISH CAMPAIGN ................................ ................................ .. 75 
FRIEDLAND AND TILSIT  ................................ ................................ .. 77 
NAPOLEON 'S COMMERCIAL WAR WITH GREAT BRITAIN  .............  81 
THE GENESIS OF THE PENINSULAR WAR ................................ ....... 85 
GLORY AT ERFURT AND HUMILIATION IN SPAIN ...........................  91 
THE AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN  ................................ .............................  97 
THE AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN CONTINUED  ................................ ...... 103 
THE WAR IN POLAND AND TYROL  ................................ ...............  106 
A BROKEN FRIENDSHIP AND WHAT IT BROUGHT  .......................  111 
THE RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN ................................ ..............................  116 
THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY INTO MOSCOW—AND AFTER  ..............  121 
THE MARCH OF HUMILIATION  ................................ .....................  125 
THE BEGINNING OF THE END—THE LEIPZIG CAMPAIGN  ...........  128 
THE CONQUEST OF THE CONQUEROR  ................................ ..........  132 
THE PRISONER OF EUROP E ................................ ...........................  138 
 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  6 CHAPTER I 
NAPOLEON THE BOY 
(1769 -1778)  
Whenever we hear the name of Napoleon mentioned, 
or see it printed in a book, it is usually in connection with a 
hard-fought victory on the battlefield. He certainly spent most 
of his life in the camp, and enjoyed the society of soldiers 
more than that of courtiers. The thunder of guns, the charge of 
cavalry, and the flash of bayonets as they glittered in the sun, 
appealed to him with much the same force as music to more 
ordinary  folk. Indeed, he himself tells us that "the cries of the 
dying, the tears of the hopeless, surrounded my cradle from 
the moment of my birth."  
We are apt to forget that this mighty conqueror, whom 
Carlyle calls "our last great man," had a childhood at all . He 
was born nearly a century and a half ago, on the 15th August 
1769 to be exact, in the little town of Ajaccio; the capital of 
picturesque Corsica This miniature island rises a bold tree -
covered rock in the blue waters of the Mediterranean, fifty 
miles west of the coast of Italy. It had been sold to France by 
the Republic of Genoa the previous year, but the inhabitants 
had fought for their independence with praiseworthy 
determination. Then civil war broke out, and the struggle 
finally ended three months before the birth of the boy who was 
to become the ruler of the conquering nation. The Corsicans 
had their revenge in time, although in a way very different 
from what they could have expected.  
Letizia Bonaparte, Napoleon's mother, was as beautiful 
as she w as energetic, and her famous son never allowed 
anyone to speak ill of her. "My excellent mother," said he, not 
long before his death, "is a woman of courage and of great talent . . . she is capable of doing everything for me," and he 
added that the high po sition which he attained was due largely 
to the careful way in which she brought him up. "It is to my 
mother, to her good precepts and upright example, that I owe 
my success and any great thing I have accomplished," he 
averred, while to a general he remark ed, "My mother was a 
superb woman, a woman of ability and courage." A truly great 
man always speaks well of his mother.  
Napoleon was Letizia's fourth child, two having died in 
infancy, while Joseph, the surviving son, was still unable to 
toddle when the l atest addition to the family was in his cradle. 
His father was a happy -go-lucky kind of man of good 
ancestry, a lawyer by profession, who on the landing of the 
French had resigned the pen for the sword. He enlisted in the 
army raised by Pascal Paoli to def end the island, for the 
Corsicans were then a very warlike people and much sought 
after as soldiers, and it is supposed by some that he acted as 
Paoli's secretary. It is certain that the patriot showed him 
marked favour, which was never repaid.  
When Paoli  and his loyal band were forced to make 
their escape to the hospitable shores of England, Charles 
Bonaparte meekly accepted the pardon offered to those who 
would lay down their arms and acknowledge Louis XV. of 
France as their King. After events proved the  wisdom of his 
choice, but scarcely justified his action.  
The house in which the Bonaparte family lived at 
Ajaccio is still standing, but has been patched up and repaired 
so frequently that probably little of the original fabric remains. 
It now belongs to  the ex -Empress Eugenie, the consort of 
Napoleon's ill -fated nephew who is known to history as 
Napoleon III. You would not call it a mansion, and yet it 
contains a spacious ballroom, a large square drawing -room, 
Charles Bonaparte's study, a dining -room, a nursery, several 
bedrooms, and a dressing -room. Some of the old furniture is 
left, namely the Chippendale sofa on which the future 
Emperor was born, his mother's spinet, and his father's desk. 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  7 There is also a little etching of Napoleon on horseback by the 
late Prince Imperial, and one or two statuettes and portraits. In 
the Town Hall near by is a picture of Letizia which testifies to 
her good looks —she was known as "the beauty of Ajaccio!"  
As a child Napoleon was impetuous, self -confident, 
and apt to be ba d-tempered. If a playmate did something 
which displeased him the culprit was rewarded with kicks, 
bites and scratches. Letizia did her best to break him of this 
bad habit, with little success, for he resented interference to 
the end of his days. When he wa s Emperor he used to tell an 
anecdote of his early life which proves that his mother did 
more than scold him when he got into mischief.  
There were some fig -trees in the garden attached to his 
home, and Napoleon was very fond of climbing them. Letizia, 
fearing an accident, forbade him to do so. "One day, however," 
he relates, "when I was idle, and at a loss for something to do, 
I took it in my head to long for some of those figs. They were 
ripe; no one saw me, or could know anything of the matter. I 
made my  escape, ran to the tree, and gathered the whole. My 
appetite being satisfied, I was providing for the future by 
filling my pockets, when an unlucky gardener came in sight. I 
was half -dead with fear, and remained fixed on the branch of 
the tree, where he h ad surprised me. He wished to seize me 
and take me to my mother. Despair made me eloquent; I 
represented my distress, promised to keep away from the figs 
in future, and he seemed satisfied. I congratulated myself on 
having come off so well, and fancied tha t the adventure would 
never be known; but the traitor told all. The next day my 
mother wanted to go and gather some figs. I had not left any, 
there was none to be found: the gardener came, great 
reproaches followed, and an exposure." The result was a 
thras hing  
Probably the busy housewife taught Napoleon his 
letters, assisted by his uncle Joseph Fesch, who was but six 
years his senior, while from his great uncle, Archdeacon 
Lucien Bonaparte, he learned a little Bible history. The three "R.'s" were drilled i nto him by nuns, and as the establishment 
admitted girls as well as boys, Napoleon took a fancy to one of 
the former, thereby incurring the ridicule of some of his 
schoolfellows. They were never tired of jeering at him with a 
little rhyme, specially compos ed for the occasion, to the effect 
that "Napoleon with his stockings half off makes love to 
Giacommetta." The translation, of course, does not jingle as in 
the Corsican patois. It must not be inferred that he was a good -
looking or attractive boy. On the co ntrary, he had a sallow 
complexion, was invariably untidy, and inclined to be moody.  
Later, he went to a more advanced school, and from 
thence to the seminary of the Abbe Recco. If he was not a 
brilliant scholar he was certainly more interested in 
mathema tics than is the modern boy in locomotives, and that is 
admitting a good deal. He also excelled in geography. Both 
studies proved useful aides -de-camp when Napoleon began to 
master the intricate arts of strategy and tactics. It is on record 
that when Napol eon was very young he rode on a high -spirited 
pony to a neighbouring windmill, and after persuading the 
miller to tell him how much corn it ground in an hour, quietly 
sat down and worked out the quantity used per day and week. 
The tyrant then returned to h is panic -stricken mother, who had 
convinced herself that the boy had probably fallen off his fiery 
steed and been trampled to death.  
When opportunity occurred, the youthful Napoleon 
scribbled sums on the nursery walls and drew crude outlines of 
soldiers m arching in regimental order. A fondness for the open 
air early manifested itself, and the earnest student would 
remain out -of-doors for hours at a stretch, provided he was 
allowed to follow his favourite pursuits without being 
disturbed. Should his brother  dare to interfere when he was 
working in the little wooden shanty which his thoughtful 
mother had caused to be erected for him, Napoleon's hasty 
temper would get the upper hand, and the intruder would be 
forced to beat a hasty retreat, perhaps in a shower  of sticks and 
stones.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  8 "My brother Joseph," he tells us, "was the one with 
whom I was oftenest in trouble; he was beaten, bitten, abused. 
I went to complain before he had time to recover from his 
confusion. I had need to be on the alert; our mother would 
have repressed my warlike humour, she would not have put up 
with my caprices. Her tenderness was allied with severity: she 
punished, rewarded all alike; the good, the bad, nothing 
escaped her. My father, a man of sense, but too fond of 
pleasure to pay much  attention to our infancy, sometimes 
attempted to excuse our faults: 'Let them alone,' she replied, 'it 
is not your business, it is I who must look after them.' She did, 
indeed, watch over us with a solicitude unexampled. Every 
low sentiment, every ungener ous affection was discouraged: 
she suffered nothing but what was good and elevated to take 
root in our youthful understandings. She abhorred falsehood, 
was provoked by disobedience: she passed over none of our 
faults."  
Napoleon's father had no difficulty in deciding what 
profession to choose for his second son. As for Joseph, he 
determined that he should enter the priesthood. Napoleon was 
positive his brother would make a good bishop, and said so.  
In this matter of settling the life -work of his boys 
Charl es Bonaparte was helped by the kindly -disposed 
Marboeuf, one of the two French commissioners appointed by 
the King to govern Corsica, who frequently visited the house 
in the Rue St Charles. Napoleon, although only nine years old 
was now about to enter a la rger world, to have an opportunity 
to appreciate the benefits of education on sounder lines, and to 
tread the soil of the country which received him as a humble 
pensioner of the King, and elevated him twenty -five years 
later to the Imperial throne.  CHAPT ER II 
THE SCHOOLDAYS OF NAPOLEON  
(1779 -1784)  
In France there were twelve royal military schools to 
which a certain number of sons of the poor aristocracy were 
admitted without payment. Marboeuf was successful in 
securing this benefit for Napoleon, although  his father had to 
prove to the satisfaction of the authorities that he was without 
fortune and to present a certificate to the effect that his family 
had belonged to the nobility for at least four generations. This 
done, the way was made clear for the boy  to begin his first 
serious studies in the art of warfare. As the Corsicans spoke 
Italian and knew very little, if anything, of the French 
language, it was decided that Napoleon should stay for a time 
with his brother Joseph at the College of Autun so that  he 
might acquire some knowledge of the language both were 
henceforth to speak. To the end of his days Napoleon never 
learnt to spell correctly, his pronunciation was oftentimes 
peculiar, and his writing invariably abominable.  
Charles Marie de Bonaparte, duly accompanied by 
Joseph, Napoleon, Uncle Fesch, and a cousin named Aurelio 
Varese, set off for the land of their adoption in the middle of 
December 1778. The good Letizia sobbed bitterly when she 
parted with her two sons, but there were now several othe r 
children to be cared for, which must have consoled her to 
some extent. The travellers passed through Tuscany, where the 
beautiful city of Florence left an impression on the plastic 
mind of the embryo soldier, and a momentary sight of the 
Grand Duke affor ded him intense pleasure. They were 
fragmentary foretastes of things to come, when Napoleon's 
troops would overrun the land of the Medici and the scions of 
royal houses would appreciate a nod or a glance from the now 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  9 unknown lad whose eyes opened wide with  astonishment at 
the sights and scenes of pre -Revolutionary Europe.  
On the 1st January 1779, Autun was reached, and the 
boys had their first experience of what it means to be hundreds 
of miles from home and in a country where rugged little 
Corsica, if men tioned at all, was sneered at, and its inhabitants 
regarded as scarcely better than savages. Another separation 
came towards the end of the following April, when Napoleon 
left for Brienne, now inseparably associated with his name and 
fame. Tradition has it  that Joseph wept copiously at the 
moment of departure, but down his brother's cheek there 
coursed a solitary tear. In the opinion of the Abbe Simon, who 
held the important post of sub -principal of the College, this 
was proof that Napoleon felt the wrench none the less keenly. 
Joseph allowed his emotions to govern him; Napoleon 
controlled his heart by his will, then as always.  
It may be thought peculiar that Brienne, like the other 
military schools, was controlled by monks. The arrangement 
was really not s o extraordinary as it would appear. Religion, 
up to the time of the Revolution, had always played an 
important part in the State, and that great epoch -making 
volcano had done nothing more than rumble at the period with 
which we are dealing. The Superior wa s, of course, the head of 
the establishment, the various Fathers having particular 
subjects to teach in which they more or less excelled. 
Occasionally a member of the laity assisted in a subordinate 
capacity. Pichegru, who was to become famous in the 
profe ssion of Napoleon's choice, taught the elementary class at 
Brienne.  
The pupils lived in almost monastic seclusion. They 
were not allowed to leave the precincts for the whole of the six 
years which were allotted to them for education, and during 
the holida ys were never quite free from lessons. 'What seems a 
most exacting regime in some ways was, however, neutralized 
to some extent by rules judiciously forgotten.  St Germain, the energetic Minister of War who had 
advised the King to found the military school s, had spent 
much time and thought in drawing up elaborate regulations for 
their government. The studies included geography, history, 
grammar, mathematics, Latin, French poetry, German, 
drawing, music, and eventually English. Special attention was 
paid, as  was only natural, to the art of war, "the trade of 
barbarians," as Napoleon once termed it in a capricious 
moment. Although rich in promise the colleges fell far short of 
the high ideals which St Germain had hoped for them, as do so 
many plans for the imp rovement of the existing order of 
things.  
 
 
 
NAPOLEON  AT BRIENNE .  
Notwithstanding all that has been written of Napoleon's 
morose and sullen disposition during h is student days, it must 
not be forgotten that the young cadet was at a decided 
disadvantage in making friends. The matter of language alone 
was a sufficient barrier to intimate intercourse at this stage of 
his scholastic career, and his habit of diligent study ill -
accorded with the frivolous frittering away of time indulged in 
by so many of the King's scholars. Napoleon was a hard 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  10 worker, but only in subjects which most appealed to him, such 
as history, geography, and mathematics, all of which had a 
specia l bearing on his future career. Latin he despised as being 
of no practical value to a soldier; translations he positively 
loathed. He early learned to eliminate the nonessential and 
trivial, and the easy mastery of details became almost second 
nature to hi m.  
His patriotism for his own country burned like a 
consuming fire. It is related that one day Napoleon came 
across a portrait of Choiseul, the hated Minister of Foreign 
Affairs under Louis XV. who had been the main instigator of 
the seizure of Corsica by  the French. The most insulting 
remarks were hurled at the painted presentment of the man he 
so detested. On another occasion it is said that he averred he 
would do the French as much harm as he possibly could. If the 
story is not legendary, the statement was doubtless made in a 
moment of anger; perhaps after some thoughtless fellow 
student had taunted him about the poverty of his family, or the 
downfall of Paoli, the Corsican patriot whom he so much 
admired. His hot Southern blood boiled with indignation w hen 
anything was said which gave offence, and he scarcely, if ever, 
endeavoured to curb his hasty temper. He went so far as to 
challenge a cadet to a duel. To Bourrienne alone, a lad of his 
own age, did he show a marked attachment, and a warm 
friendship wa s cemented between them. Napoleon did not 
forget his school -chum in later years, and when a General 
appointed him to the important position of his private 
secretary. In his Memoirs   Bourrienne gives us several 
intimate glimpses of the obscure lad who was t o make Europe 
his footstool. He tells us that Napoleon frequently meditated 
on the conquest of his native island; that the unworthy part 
played by his father was never forgiven; that he spent much of 
his time in solitude. Bourrienne also confesses that in 
exchange for assistance in Latin the future Emperor would 
lend him a helping hand with his mathematics, the calculations 
being made with extraordinary clearness and rapidity.  "At Brienne," his schoolfellow adds, "Bonaparte was 
remarkable for the dark colo ur of his complexion, which the 
climate of France afterwards very much changed, as well as 
for his piercing and scrutinizing glance, and for the style of his 
conversation, both with his masters and companions. His 
conversation almost always gave one the id ea of ill -humour, 
and he was certainly not very sociable. This I think may be 
attributed to the misfortunes of his family during his 
childhood, and the impressions made on his mind by the 
subjugation of his country."  
In these trying days Napoleon's retice nt disposition 
served him in good stead. He preferred the library of the 
school to the playground. While the other boys were enjoying 
a game Napoleon was usually poring over the pages of 
Plutarch, and deriving inspiration and encouragement from the 
deeds o f old -time heroes who figure in the Lives of Illustrious 
Men. Greek poetry had a fascination for him not evident in 
many lads of his tender age. "With my sword by my side," he 
writes to his mother, "and Homer in my pocket, I hope to 
carve my way through th e world." Caesar's Gallic War   was 
also a favourite. Although Napoleon was by no means 
generally popular, and certainly never inclined to be genial, 
the majority of the students gradually began to respect him. It 
is on record that he was never a sneak, pre ferring to bear 
punishment himself rather than to divulge the name of a 
miscreant.  
The love of monks for the soil is proverbial; this may 
have been the reason why a small portion of ground was 
allotted to each student at Brienne. Whatever healthy exercise  
Napoleon was supposed to derive from his garden was 
speedily discounted. He set to work with feverish activity, 
transformed the desert into an oasis, planted trees and shrubs, 
and surrounded the whole by a palisade in true military 
fashion. This done, he troubled no more about agricultural 
pursuits but was content to sit in his bower and read with little 
fear of disturbance.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  11 In the winter of 1783 -4, an abnormally severe season, 
the anchorite had an opportunity to show his military powers. 
Napoleon suggest ed to the students that they should build a 
fort of snow complete in every detail. The school was then 
divided into two armies, Napoleon sometimes directing the 
assault, at others defending the fortifications. It was rough 
play, and several serious acciden ts befell the cadets, who 
entered into the spirit of the thing with more alacrity than the 
peace -loving monks approved. Day after day this mock 
warfare was kept up, and Napoleon was usually the hero of 
each encounter.  
You can imagine him standing there in  his picturesque 
costume: blue coat with red facings and white metal buttons, 
blue breeches, and a waistcoat of the same colour faced with 
white. Horace Vernet has depicted the scene in one of his 
many Napoleonic paintings. The young commander, erect and 
defiant, is directing the storming of the fort by cadets who, for 
the most part, have taken off their coats in order to secure a 
better aim. An attacking party is climbing the ramparts, some 
of the units with success, others with disaster. The picture has 
been reproduced many times, and is one of the few dealing 
with the early period of the Conqueror's career.  
Without question these were the happiest days of 
Napoleon's youth. He was not a brilliant scholar, and there are 
no records to show that he won parti cular distinction beyond 
sharing a first prize for mathematics with Bourrienne, which 
goes to prove that the latter profited by the teaching of his 
chum. Napoleon however, was made commander of a 
company of cadets —which amply atoned, from his own point 
of view, for all the "ploughing" he underwent at examinations. 
The opinion of M. de Keralio, one of the inspectors of the 
military schools, as to Napoleon's efficiency is as follows:  
"SCHOOL  OF BRIENNE :State of the King's scholars 
eligible from their age to enter into the service or to pass to the 
school at Paris; to wit, M. de Buonaparte (Napoleon) ,born the 
15th August, 1769, in height 4 feet 10 inches 10 lines, has finished his fourth season; of good constitution, health 
excellent; character submissive, ho nest and grateful; conduct 
very regular; has always distinguished himself by his 
application to mathematics; understands history and 
geography tolerably well; is indifferently skilled in merely 
ornamental studies and in Latin, in which he has only finished  
his fourth course; would make an excellent sailor; deserves to 
be passed on to the school at Paris."  
In the light of after events this diagnosis of his 
character is peculiar; it may be added that he had a deep -
rooted affection for those at home in the fa r-off little island in 
the Mediterranean. He took upon himself the burden of 
thinking for the family, and provided them with plenty of 
gratuitous advice not altogether without wisdom.  
A few months before Napoleon placed his foot on the 
next stepping -stone  to fame and fortune he was joined at 
Brienne by his brother Lucien, who had been at Autun. In a 
note to one of his uncles Napoleon expresses his satisfaction 
with the newcomer, "for a beginning," but pours out a fierce 
diatribe against Joseph's wish to gi ve up his idea of becoming 
a priest and entering the army. In reality there were more 
difficulties in the way than those mentioned by the writer, and 
eventually the eldest son was taken home to Corsica by his 
father. Neither was it destined that Napoleon s hould become a 
sailor. Another inspector named Iteynaud de Monts visited the 
school in 1784, and decided that the promising cadet should 
enter the Military School of Paris, for which institution he left 
on the 30th October. To the certificate which was for warded, a 
brief but sufficiently comprehensive note was added: 
"Character masterful, impetuous and headstrong." A complete 
contradiction of M. de Keralio's statement.  
No one seeing the dwarfed figure of the lad of fifteen, 
as he passed through the entranc e of the Ecole Militaire, would 
have cared to prophecy that in a few years the King's scholar 
would be sitting as Emperor of the French on the throne of his 
benefactor. Time reveals its own secrets.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  12 CHAPTER III 
NAPOLEON AS OFFICER AND AUTHOR  
(1784 -1791)  
Without waiting to see if he would like the school and 
the tutors at Paris, or making the hundred and one excuses 
which usually crowd a schoolboy's brain before definitely 
settling down to work, Napoleon applied himself to the 
various subjects necessary to  enable him to enter the artillery. 
This branch of the service held out most possibilities from the 
point of view of sheer merit, and he chose wisely. At the 
examination held in September 1785, his name appears as 
forty -second on the list of candidates, wh ich is neither 
particularly good nor particularly bad, and would suggest that 
a certain portion of his time was devoted to studies outside the 
immediate radius of the official course.  
Napoleon had the good fortune to find a friend in 
Alexandre Desmazis, w ho shared his room with him and 
became Administrator of the Crown Buildings during the 
Consulate. Many other instances might be given of Napoleon's 
kindness of heart to those who were not so successful in the 
race of life as was their benefactor. It is a p oint, and an 
important one, lost sight of by many of his biographers. There 
was certainly a better side of the mighty Corsican —he was not 
all blood and iron.  
Apparently the studies of the chums at the Ecole 
Militaire were successful, for they were appoint ed in the 
succeeding October, to the regiment of La Fere, stationed at 
Valence, Napoleon as second lieutenant. The two newly -
fledged officers had so little money that they were forced to 
tramp a considerable distance on foot. It was very ignominious 
and hu miliating, but pride is best swallowed quickly and forgotten, like a blue pill. Napoleon was now fatherless, and 
he felt his responsible position very keenly. Although not the 
head of the family in reality, he was nominally, for Joseph was 
far behind his b rother in every material respect.  
Besides his ordinary military duties Napoleon had to 
attend lectures on many subjects connected with his 
profession, including fortifications, chemistry, and 
mathematics. He seems to have worn off some of the rugged 
corne rs of his character. We find him with many friends, 
including one or two members of the fair sex. Upon one lady 
in particular, namely Mme. Gregoire de Colombier, he made a 
most favourable impression, and he received many invitations 
to her country house at  Basseaux. She flattered him, but also 
tendered much practical advice. Napoleon was too young to 
fall in love seriously, but he passed many bright hours with 
Caroline, the daughter of his hostess, and a warm attachment 
sprang up between them. He ate fruit with her in the garden, 
and afterwards remarked that those days were some of the 
happiest in his triumphant but pathetic life. "We were the most 
innocent creatures imaginable," he says, "we contrived little 
meetings together; I well remember one which took  place on a 
midsummer morning, just as daylight was beginning to dawn. 
It will scarcely be believed that all our happiness consisted in 
eating cherries together."  
Bonaparte also visited the Permons; and Madame 
Junot, afterwards Duchess of Abrantes, has le ft us a witty pen -
picture of him as he appeared in full regimentals at the age of 
sixteen.  
"There was one part of his dress," she writes, "which 
had a very droll appearance —that was his boots. They were so 
high and wide that his thin little legs seemed bu ried in their 
amplitude. Young people are always ready to observe anything 
ridiculous, and as soon as my sister and I saw Napoleon enter 
the drawing -room, we burst into a loud fit of laughter. 
Buonaparte could not relish a joke; and when he found himself 
the object of merriment he grew angry. My sister, who was 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  13 some years older than I, told him that since he wore a sword 
he ought to be gallant to ladies, and, instead of being angry, 
should be happy that they joked with him. 'You are nothing 
but a child, a l ittle school -girl,' said Napoleon, in a tone of 
contempt. Cecile, who was twelve or thirteen years of age, was 
highly indignant at being called a child, and she hastily 
resented the affront by replying to Bonaparte, 'And you are 
nothing but a Puss in Boots !' This excited a general laugh 
among all present except Napoleon, whose rage I will not 
attempt to describe." A few days later the young officer went 
to a bookseller's shop, purchased a dainty edition of Puss in 
Boots , and presented it to the culprit. Thi s was his way of 
apologizing.  
For a time he relaxed his close application to study 
without neglecting his books altogether, and turned author. 
There is a pessimistic strain in all his literary efforts at this 
period, due no doubt to home -sickness, overwor k, and perhaps 
lack of means, his income certainly never totaling more than 
twenty shillings a week. He even contemplated suicide, 
evidence of which is found in a manuscript dated the 3rd May, 
1786.  
"Always alone in the midst of men," he complains, "I 
come back to my rooms to dream with myself, and to 
surrender myself to all the vivacity of my melancholy. 
Towards which side is it turned to -day? To the side of death. 
In the dawn of my days I can still hope to live a long time, but 
I have been away from my c ountry for about six or seven 
years. What pleasures shall I not enjoy when in four months' 
time I see once more my compatriots and my relations? From 
the tender sensations with which the recollections of the 
pleasures of my childhood now fill me, may I not  infer that my 
happiness will be complete? What madness leads me, then, to 
wish my death? Doubtless the thought: What is there to do in 
this world?"  
This makes strange reading, but it shows that even the 
greatest men have periods of depression like ordina ry folk. He continues in this strain, passes sentence on France for having 
humiliated his beloved Corsica, and says scarcely less hard 
things of his own countrymen: "They are no longer those 
Corsicans, whom a hero inspired with his virtues, enemies of 
tyrants, of luxury, of demoralized towns." Towards the end he 
shows a tinge of enthusiasm; his fighting instinct gets the 
better of him: "A good patriot ought to die when his 
Fatherland has ceased to exist. If the deliverance of my fellow -
countrymen depended u pon the death of a single man, I would 
go immediately and plunge the sword which would avenge my 
country and its violated laws into the breast of tyrants." He 
again lapses into melancholy, concluding with a disgust for 
everything.  
The second lieutenant di d not take his own life; he 
lived down his troubles instead. Indeed his favourite motto, 
and one well worthy of note by every reader of this volume, 
was "The truest wisdom is a resolute determination." In 
August 1786, a rift in the cloud showed the proverb ial silver 
lining, and the chance of a little excitement, which was bread 
and meat to him, came along. A miniature rebellion had 
broken out at Lyons, and it was deemed necessary to call out 
the military. The company at Valence to which Napoleon 
belonged wa s marched to the seat of the trouble. Before it 
arrived the insurrection had blown over, thereby shattering the 
officer's hope of distinguishing himself.  
From Lyons he proceeded northward to Douay, in 
Flanders, where he contracted malarial fever which ten ded to 
undermine his constitution for several years afterwards. Bad 
news also reached him from Corsica. His mother appealed to 
him to come home and give her the benefits of his advice and 
assistance. Archdeacon Lucien —Napoleon's great -uncle, who 
had hither to acted as head of the family —was daily growing 
more feeble: the good Letizia feared the worst. Her means 
were distressingly small, her family inordinately large for the 
scanty resources at her disposal. On the 1st of September 
1786, he set out for his be loved island. Passing through Aix, 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  14 he was cheered by a visit to his uncle Fesch and his brother 
Lucien, both of whom were studying at the Seminary with a 
view to entering the priesthood. Exactly a fortnight afterwards, 
Napoleon landed at Ajaccio with a sma ll trunk of clothes and a 
larger one of books. The works of Plutarch, Plato, Cicero, 
Nepos, Livy, Tacitus, Montaigne, Montesquieu, Raynal, 
Corneille, Racine, Voltaire, and the poems of Ossian were all 
represented.  
Napoleon applied himself with his usual i ndustry to 
straightening out the tangled skein of family troubles. He 
found it by no means an easy matter, especially as the French 
Government was involved. The latter had been anxious to 
introduce the silk industry in their new dependency, and 
Charles Bon aparte had been one of the first to seize upon the 
idea because he thought there was "money in it." In 1782 he 
had made a plantation of young mulberry trees for the purpose 
of rearing silkworms, but instead of handing over the whole of 
the money which had been agreed upon in advance, 2700 
livres still remained to be paid by the State. On the strength of 
a certificate of ill -health, Napoleon's leave was extended from 
the end of March 1787, to the beginning of December, and 
later until the 1st June 1788. He w andered about the island, 
visiting his old haunts and companions, but more often finding 
his greatest consolation in lonely communion with Nature. 
Sometimes he would turn to his literary pursuits, adding a few 
paragraphs to a History of Corsica , which was occupying 
some of his leisure moments. He also composed a short story 
dealing with English history, entitled The Count of Essex . A 
novel having its setting in Corsica followed, and another 
attempt at fiction, which he called The Masked Prophet , 
perhaps the  best of the three as regards literary style.  
On the 12th September 1787, he left Corsica for Paris, 
in order to clear up the matter of the mulberry trees. He found 
it impossible to exact money from a bankrupt exchequer, and 
although he pressed the claim no success attended his efforts. 
Napoleon accordingly returned to Ajaccio, where he spent part of his spare time drawing up plans for the defence of places 
round the coast, and postponed his departure until the day he 
was due to join his regiment at Auxonn e. Ever of a calculating 
nature, the young officer rightly surmised that in those days of 
lax discipline his absence would not be noticed, or if it were 
that the insubordination would be passed over.  
In the following August (1788) it became evident that 
the serious work he had put in while his companions were 
lounging about or frittering away their time was beginning to 
have its due effect. He became a member of a commission 
appointed to inquire into the merits or demerits of certain 
pieces of artillery, a nd one of the duties —no slight one —
which fell to his share was the drawing up of the report. 
Misfortune, however, had not altogether ceased paying him 
unwelcome attentions, and, for some reason or other, probably 
a matter connected with some work on the fo rtifications of 
which he had the oversight, Napoleon was placed under arrest 
for a day.  
His own scheme of education went on apace, as his 
manuscript notebooks, now in the Lorenzo Medici Library at 
Florence, abundantly testify. One of the works singled out  by 
him for attention was a French translation of Barrow's History 
of England, from the Times of Julius Caesar to the Peace of 
1762 . His remarks show that he had a special admiration for 
such men as Hereward the Wake, familiar to all of us in the 
pages of Kingsley, or in the more recently published historical 
romance, The Story of Hereward , by Mr Douglas C. Stedman; 
Simon de Montfort, whom Napoleon terms "one of the 
greatest Englishmen"; and the Earl of Arundel, who "died a 
martyr for the liberty of his cou ntry." Cromwell, he says, "was 
in his early days a libertine. Religion took possession of him, 
and he became a prophet. Courageous, clever, deceitful, 
dissimulating, his early principles of republican exaltation 
yielded to the devouring flame of his ambiti on, and, after 
having tasted the sweets of power, he aspired to the pleasure 
of reigning alone. He had a strong constitution, and had a 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  15 manly but brusque manner. From the most austere religious 
functions he passed to the most frivolous amusements, and 
made  himself ridiculous by his buffoonery. He was naturally 
just and even -tempered." Many of these remarks might be 
applied not inaptly to Napoleon himself, and if he is not 
absolutely just to Cromwell, they show that he had a very 
good understanding of the Pr otector's general character, and 
that he read to learn and not simply to "kill time," or for 
amusement.  
In April 1789 was heard the distant rumble which 
heralded the French Revolution, before it broke out in all its 
hideous extravagancies. Riots had taken  place at Seurre, but as 
in the case of the affair at Lyons, they were quelled before 
Napoleon or his colleagues put foot in the place. Two months 
of enforced idleness were spent in the former town before the 
company was marched back to its headquarters at  Auxonne 
without having had the slightest chance to distinguish itself. 
'When it could have proved useful it broke into open mutiny. 
This was in July 1789, when a riot took place and the soldiers 
joined the rebels.  
Napoleon had now completed his History o f Corsica , 
and on the disgrace of Marbeuf, Bishop of Sens, to whom he 
had hoped to dedicate it, he decided to ask Paoli to become his 
patron. He sent him his precious manuscript feeling assured 
that it would be well received, but the acknowledgment was a 
rebuff couched in courteous terms. Moreover, the original was 
mislaid by Paoli, and this unfortunate happening went far to 
shake the faith of its writer in the great Corsican leader at a 
later date.  
It is now necessary for us to try to understand in some 
measure the aims and objects of the vast disturbance known to 
history as the French Revolution. For generations the 
monarchy and aristocracy of France had refused to listen to the 
cry of the oppressed people whom they governed. The State 
was grossly mismana ged; money which should have remained 
in the pockets of the distressed people was exacted from them and given to unworthy Court favourites, who spent it in a 
variety of ways which did not benefit the nation. The nobles 
and titled clergy paid no taxes, the burden thus fell with undue 
weight on the middle classes —even now the milch -cow of the 
State—and the peasants, who toiled day and night for bread. 
Serious reform was always postponed, although it had been 
attempted by King Louis XVI. in a feeble and half -hearted 
way.  
A bitter hatred of the persons, institutions, and 
traditions which contributed to this undesirable state of things 
was the inevitable consequence; as so often happens, those 
who desired the righting of wrongs carried their measures too 
far. "L iberty, equality, and fraternity" were the passwords of 
the leaders of the new order, but obviously the ideal could not 
be brought about when nearly everybody held a different 
theory as to how the abuses were to be rectified. The writings 
of such philosoph ers as Montesquieu, Voltaire, and Rousseau, 
all of which had been diligently perused by Napoleon, had 
done much to fan the smouldering embers into flames. Soon 
the whole land was ablaze, massacres became of daily 
occurrence, the King and Queen paid the pri ce with their 
heads, the monarchies of Europe were shaken to their very 
foundations. And what did the people get in exchange for this 
giant upheaval? The iron despotism of one man, who 
continued the Revolution in his own person; made the 
Continent one vast  battlefield; drew from France her best 
manhood and her treasure, and left her territory smaller than 
when lie first put foot on her soil.  
At the moment it was impossible for Napoleon to 
realise the true meaning of the dreadful events which were 
approachi ng with such unrestrained rapidity. He foresaw the 
end of the old state of affairs, and rightly conjectured that they 
would be swept away never to return; but Corsica was the 
centre of his interests rather than France. Rent asunder by 
conflicting ambitions  and civil war, his native island might yet 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  16 tear herself from her hated conquerors. So at least he told 
himself in his moments of reflection.  
In September 1789, Bonaparte again obtained leave of 
absence until the 1st June 1790. His health was by no means 
good when he embarked at Marseilles; a mutiny had occurred 
in his regiment, and altogether his outlook was as gloomy as 
ever. Freedom from his irksome military duties, however, and 
the bracing effect of the sea -air rapidly revived his drooping 
spirits and failing energy.  
The echo of the Revolution had been heard in far -off 
Corsica; there were disturbances, and serious trouble seemed 
likely, as soldiers were on the move intent upon restoring the 
sway of the hated royalist authorities. Napoleon called a 
meet ing of patriots, harangued them, and headed a petition to 
the democratic National Assembly to restore independence to 
Corsica. He began to organise a National Guard, which was 
almost immediately dissolved by Vicomte de Barrin, the 
French Governor. The arde nt young man of twenty thereupon 
set out for Bastia, the official capital of the island, where a 
passage of arms took place between the soldiers and the 
people. The latter won the day, and Barrin was forced to order 
the arming of the Civic Guard as they wi shed.  
Shortly afterwards news arrived that the National 
Assembly had decided that Corsica should become a part of 
the Kingdom of France and enjoy the same constitution. All 
thought of independence seems to have instantly vanished 
from Napoleon's mind. He laid down the cudgels without 
further ado, saying that France "has opened her bosom to us, 
henceforth we have he same interests and the same solicitudes; 
it is the sea alone which separates us." Joseph being elected a 
member of the Municipal Council, the B onaparte family was 
able to lift up its head again. Further leave of absence on the 
score of ill -health was again requested by Napoleon and 
granted. In reality he was taking an active part in affairs, and 
enjoying it, for Corsica was more or less in a stat e of anarchy. 
At Ajaccio he joined a Radical Club called the Patriotic Society, and wrote and printed a Letter   to Buttafuoco, one of 
the most hated men in Corsica, who, since the death of 
Napoleon's father, had represented the nobility of the island at 
Versailles. It is full of abuse, the writer in his passionate 
ardour going so far as to say that, having burnt Buttafuoco in 
effigy, most of the Corsicans would like to burn him in person. 
Moreover, Paoli was returning, and he foresaw an opportunity 
of servi ng him. Paoli received a magnificent reception at 
Bastia when he arrived on the 17th July. The time for aiding 
the General of the Corsicans had not yet come, however, and 
Napoleon again set sail for France, reaching Auxonne, a 
picturesque little town on th e river Saone, in February 1791.  
Several years afterwards, in 1803 to be precise, when 
he was planning the invasion of our own fair land, Napoleon 
thus summed up his youthful days to Madame de Remusat: "I 
was educated at a military school, and I showed no  aptitude 
for anything but the exact sciences. Every one said of me, 
'That child will never be good for anything but geometry.' I 
kept aloof from my schoolfellows. I had chosen a little corner 
in the school grounds, where I would sit and dream at my ease; 
for I have always liked reverie. When my companions tried to 
usurp possession of this corner, I defended it with all my 
might. I already knew by instinct that my will was to override 
that of others, and that what pleased me was to belong to me. I 
was not l iked at school. It takes time to make oneself liked; 
and, even when I had nothing to do, I always felt vaguely that 
I had no time to lose.  
"I entered the service, and soon grew tired of garrison 
work. I began to read novels, and they interested me deeply.  I 
even tried to write some. This occupation brought out 
something of my imagination, which mingled itself with the 
positive knowledge I had acquired, and I often let myself 
dream in order that I might afterwards measure my dreams by 
the compass of my reas on. I threw myself into an ideal world, 
and I endeavoured to find out in what precise points it differed 
from the actual world in which I lived. I have always liked 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  17 analysis, and, if I were to be seriously in love, I should analyze 
my love bit by bit. Why?   and How?   are questions so useful 
that they cannot be too often asked. I conquered, rather than 
studied, history; that is to say, I did not care to retain and did 
not retain anything that could not give me a new idea; I 
disdained all that was useless, bu t took possession of certain 
results which pleased me."  
It was this skilful combining of the practical and the 
imaginative which enabled Napoleon to project his vast 
schemes for the reformation of Europe; it was the elimination 
of the former and the subst itution of an overweening self -
confidence which deprived the mighty conqueror of "the 
throne o' the world."  CHAPTER IV 
NAPOLEON AND THE CORSICAN VOLUNTEERS  
(1791 -1792)  
Napoleon again had a companion on his return voyage 
to France in the person of his bro ther Louis, a bright little 
fellow twelve and a half years old. If the latter could not be 
expected to take any intelligent interest in the many schemes 
for advancement which were now coursing through 
Napoleon's super -active brain, he was at least a living  link 
with the family in Ajaccio. The young lieutenant's political 
ambitions which had received so marked an incentive in 
Corsica were not allowed to sink to zero, as is so frequently 
the case when one is away from the whirl and excitement of 
their practic al influence. Rather were they nourished and fed 
by the sights and scenes Napoleon beheld as the two made 
their way to Auxonne after they had landed. The fact that he 
had exceeded his leave of absence worried him not at all, the 
penalty of six months' impr isonment, should his excuse be 
deemed invalid, being dismissed from his mind as an unlikely 
sequel. In his pocket were certificates from the Directory of 
the district of Ajaccio setting forth in glowing terms the 
services Napoleon had rendered to Corsica, and stating that his 
had been an enforced absence from duty owing to the 
unfavourable weather precluding the vessel from leaving. 
These credentials proved sufficient; he did not so much as lose 
a sou of his pay.  
Napoleon quickly returned to his old habits  of hard 
work, and his democratic opinions were voiced with greater 
vehemence to his fellow -officers, many of whom failed to 
agree with him and were not afraid to say so. Polite 
discussions frequently led to less gentlemanly arguments.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  18 The room which the two Bonapartes occupied was 
almost as poorly furnished as was Chatterton's garret. Facing 
the window was a table loaded with books, papers, and writing 
utensils. There was a chair apiece: should a visitor come, 
either Napoleon or Louis had to sit on the ed ge of the bed, the 
younger brother being accommodated at night on a mattress in 
an adjoining apartment, which was in reality a part of the room 
and scarcely larger than a cupboard. If at a later period of his 
career Napoleon showed a desire for lavish disp lay, he 
certainly was not able to indulge in luxury at Auxonne. He 
paid for everything required by Louis, clothed him, educated 
him, and thrashed him when he was disobedient or particularly 
dense in the matter of lessons. The younger Bonaparte soon 
became a general favourite, both in and outside the regiment. 
Napoleon writes with a certain amount of satisfaction that "all 
the women are in love with him." His faults seem to be 
summed up in the comprehensive but cynical phrase, "All he 
needs is knowledge."  
In the middle of June 1791, Napoleon bade farewell to 
Auxonne and set out for Valence, where the Fourth Regiment 
was in garrison, he having been made first lieutenant of the 
first company of the second battalion. His brother 
accompanied him, lodging elsewhe re, as it was not found 
convenient for Louis to remain in the same house. By way of 
recreation, frequent visits were paid to Madame de Colombier, 
but politics more and more absorbed Napoleon. He entered 
with great zest into the doings of the Society of the  Friends of 
the Constitution, an avowedly revolutionary and republican 
gathering, and soon became so popular with its members that 
he was elected secretary and librarian.  
The Academy of Lyons having offered a handsome 
prize, amounting to about £50, for th e best essay on "What 
Truths and what Sentiments is it most Important to impress 
upon Men for their Happiness?" Napoleon found further scope 
for his literary gifts. "By sentiment," he assures us in his 
competitive composition,  we enjoy ourselves, nature, our country, and the men 
who surround us," and in support of the statement he draws on 
his own experience. "You return to your country," he writes; 
"after four years of absence, you visit the spots where you 
played in your earliest age, where you first exp erienced the 
knowledge of men and the awakening of the passions. In a 
moment you live the life of your childhood, you enjoy its 
pleasures, you are fired with the love of your country, you 
have a father and a tender mother, sisters still innocent, 
brothers who are like friends; too happy man, run, fly, do not 
lose a moment. If death stop you on your way you will never 
have known the delights of life, of sweet gratitude, of tender 
respect, of sincere friendship. These are the real pleasures of 
life, and they are greater if you have a wife and children." He 
says hard things of immoderate ambition, the very disease 
which was to prove his own ruin, and calls it "a violent 
unreflecting madness, which only ceases with life —a 
conflagration, fanned by a pitiless wind , which does not end 
till it has consumed everything." We wonder whether the 
Emperor, in his hours of introspection on the island of St 
Helena, when he was proving the truth of the above statement, 
ever thought of his essay. It did not gain the prize —Napol eon's 
name was last but one on the list of competitors.  
Yet another leave of absence was requested and 
granted. It seems little short of extraordinary that, when France 
was at white heat, holidays should have been granted to 
soldiers, but such was the cas e. Napoleon and Louis saw the 
blue mountains of Corsica and their family in September 1791, 
a few weeks before the death of Archdeacon Lucien. It almost 
seemed, from Napoleon's point of view, as though Fate 
invariably had an unpleasant surprise for him whe n he visited 
Ajaccio, but Letizia always regarded her second son's 
homecoming as an act of Providence. Fortunately, his 
venerable relative left a handsome sum of money to the 
Bonapartes, a certain amount of which was invested by 
Napoleon in the purchase of  a house in Ajaccio and two 
properties some little distance away.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  19 It looked for a time as though the tide of fortune was 
beginning to turn in their favour. Joseph was elected a member 
of the Directory, the executive committee of the island, and on 
the 22n d February 1792, Napoleon was appointed Adjutant -
Major of the Corsican Volunteers at Ajaccio. Some six weeks 
later, he was elected second lieutenant -colonel, a position 
which allowed him to absent himself from his French regiment 
but made for him an enemy in Pozzo di Borgo, a man who 
afterwards rose to distinction at the Russian Court, and had 
much to do with his successful rival's fall in after years.  
Napoleon's opportunity for action soon came. 
Revolutionary principles regarded religion as of little 
consequence, and it was decided that the convents in the four 
most important towns of Corsica should be suppressed. This 
was not to be achieved without difficulty, and as strife and 
possibly bloodshed were thought highly probable, it was 
decided that a number of volunteers should be on hand at 
Ajaccio. On Easter Day 1792, a disturbance occurred in one of 
the streets. A dozen volunteers marched out to end it, only to 
make the disorder more general. Napoleon felt it his duty to 
interfere, but was obliged to take refuge after one of the men 
had been killed. The action of the volunteers was, of course, 
illegal, as they had acted on their own responsibility. Napoleon 
defended them, and in company with Quenza, his senior in 
command, endeavoured to persuade Colonel Mai llard, the 
commander of the fortress, to deliver it into their hands. The 
Colonel, however, would have nothing to do with them 
beyond giving food for their men.  
Early the following morning another band of 
volunteers entered the Seminary, fired indiscrimin ately, and 
angered the inhabitants. Disorder increased to such an extent 
as the day began to wane that it became necessary to proclaim 
martial law —in other words, the regular military were given 
absolute control until order should be restored. Various 
outrages on the part of the volunteers, of which Napoleon was 
by no means innocent, followed during the night. He endeavoured to corrupt the regular soldiers without success, 
and thus began that scheme of lying and plotting which he was 
to pursue even after he  had been elected Emperor of the 
French. He was absolutely unscrupulous when, as always, he 
had his own ends to serve. In the case under consideration, he 
undertook that his men should be kept under restraint, the 
authorities promising that they would see that the people did 
not interfere with the volunteers. Napoleon's intention may 
have been good, but his men certainly continued to behave in a 
most disgraceful manner. Eventually order was restored, and a 
rebuke administered to Napoleon by his battalion be ing 
ordered to retire to Corte.  
The part he had played did not increase his popularity, 
and he thought it well to return to the French capital a month 
after war had been declared against Austria. As he himself 
said, "The beginning of a revolution was a fi ne time for an 
enterprising young man!"  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  20 CHAPTER V 
THE EVE OF THE REIGN OF TERROR  
(1792 -1793)  
Paris was in a ferment. The King had to be guarded by 
a double cordon of soldiers, so bitter was the animosity against 
the Royal Family and all that it stood for . With his usual 
shrewdness and faculty for penetrating into the probabilities of 
the future, Napoleon correctly anticipated events, and wrote to 
his brother Joseph that "everything tends to a revolution." On 
the 20th June 1792, a wild procession of insurr ectionists, 
accompanied by cannon, made its way to the Tuileries, and 
intimidated the Guard. The latter opened the gates of the 
courtyard and the motley mob crowded into the beautiful 
palace, openly insulting King Louis and Queen Marie 
Antoinette. A republ ican Assembly had been forced upon the 
monarch, who was duty reaping the first -fruits of the harvest. 
Bourrienne gives a graphic account of what happened and how 
it affected the ardent politician of twenty -three. Napoleon's 
remarks clearly show that he had  no belief in the aspirations of 
the rebels, notwithstanding his own ardent republicanism. 
Throughout his life he always held the canaille   in profound 
contempt.  
"We met," Bourrienne tells us, "by appointment, at a 
restaurateur's   in the Rue St Honore, ne ar the Palais Royal. On 
going out we saw a mob approaching in the direction of the 
market -place, which Bonaparte estimated at from five to six 
thousand men. They were a parcel of blackguards, armed with 
weapons of every description, and shouting the grosse st abuse, 
whilst they proceeded at a rapid rate towards the Tuileries. 
This mob appeared to consist of the vilest and most profligate 
of the population of the suburbs. 'Let us follow the rabble,' 
said Bonaparte. We got the start of them, and took up our station on the terrace bordering the river. It was there that he 
was an eye -witness of the scandalous scenes that ensued; and 
it would be difficult to describe the surprise and indignation 
which they excited in him. 'Such weakness and forbearance,' 
he said, 'could not be excused '; but when the King showed 
himself at a window which looked out upon the garden, with 
the red cap, which one of the mob had just placed upon his 
head, he could no longer repress his indignation: 'What 
madness!' he loudly exclaimed, ' how could they allow that 
rabble to enter? Why do they not sweep away four or five 
hundred of them with the cannon? and then the rest would take 
themselves off very quickly.' When we sat down to dinner, he 
discussed with great good sense the causes and con sequences 
of this unrepressed insurrection. He foresaw, and developed 
with sagacity, all that would follow; and in this he was not 
mistaken."  
In a letter to Joseph written on the 3rd July, Napoleon 
again reveals himself as a philosopher. "Every one seeks his 
own interest," he says, "and wishes to rise by means of lying 
and calumny; men intrigue more contemptibly than ever. All 
that destroys ambition. One pities those who have the 
misfortune to play a part, especially when they can do without 
it. To live qu ietly, to enjoy the love of one's family 
surroundings —that, my dear fellow, if one had 4000 or 5000 
francs a year, would be the wise thing to do. One should also 
be between the ages of twenty -five and forty, when one's 
imagination has calmed down, and is n o longer troublesome. I 
embrace you, and recommend to you moderation in 
everything —in everything, do you understand? —if you wish 
to live happily."  
A week later Napoleon received a welcome letter from 
the Minister of War appointing him Captain of the 4th 
regiment of artillery, and his arrears of pay were also sent. Life 
seemed to be worth living once more. Promotion is a fine 
antidote against depression.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  21 It soon became evident that nothing short of civil 
warfare would satisfy the rioters, and on the 10th A ugust 
1792, the long pent -up storm burst with awful fury. The King, 
Queen, and other members of the royal family made their way 
to the Assembly, or Parliament, where they sat in a reporter's 
box listening to a debate as to whether Louis should be 
deposed o r suspended, and which ended in a unanimous vote 
for the latter course. Meanwhile the mob was quickly 
gathering, a dozen pieces of artillery were drawn up, and the 
insurgents assumed a threatening attitude. Many of the Swiss 
and National Guards, whose duty  it was to defend the 
Tuileries, found it necessary in the face of such overwhelming 
numbers to withdraw into the palace. Firing commenced, and 
for a time the royalists triumphed. Probably the crowd would 
have thinned away had not a foolish message arrived  from 
Louis to the effect that the Swiss were to withdraw to their 
barracks. While this was being done the rioters rushed into the 
palace and in their mad frenzy slaughtered indiscriminately 
nearly every male attendant to be found, shooting wildly at the 
bodyguard as they retreated. Another order came from the 
King that the Swiss were to lay down their arms. This the 
brave fellows did, although they knew what might happen. 
Those who were not killed by the mob were taken prisoners 
and put in the Church of th e Feuillants , and on the following 
day many of them were mercilessly massacred. Those of my 
readers who have been to Lucerne have doubtless seen the 
noble monument in bas -relief of a dying lion erected to the 
memory of the brave Swiss. Napoleon himself sav ed one of 
the bodyguard, and asserted that "If Louis XVI. had mounted 
his horse, the victory would have been his —so I judge from 
the spirit which prevailed in the morning." He always believed 
in a bold front; the King's action was an unmistakable sign of 
weakness.  
Years after at St Helena Napoleon related the events of 
the fatal day as he watched them from a furniture shop 
belonging to Bourrienne's brother, Fauvelet. "Before I arrived 
at the Carrousel," he says, "I had been met in the Rue des Petits Champs  by a group of hideous men carrying a head on 
the end of a pike. Seeing me well dressed, and looking like a 
gentleman, they came to me to make me cry, 'Vive la Nation!'   
which I did without difficulty, as you may believe. The 
chateau   was attacked by the v iolent mob. The King had for 
his defence at least as many troops as the Convention had on 
Vendemiaire 13th (October 15th), when they had to fight 
against a better -disciplined and more formidable enemy. The 
greater part of the National Guard was on the side  of the 
King—one must do them this justice. When the palace had 
been fired, and the King had taken refuge in the bosom of the 
Assembly, I ventured to penetrate into the garden. Never since 
have any of my battlefields given me such an idea of death as 
the m ass of the Swiss corpses then presented to me, whether 
the smallness of the space made the number appear larger, or 
whether it was because I was to undergo this experience for 
the first time. . . . I visited all the cafes   in the neighbourhood 
of the Assem bly; everywhere the irritation was extreme, rage 
was in every heart, it showed itself in all faces, although the 
people present were not by any means of the lower class, and 
all these places must have been daily frequented by the same 
customers, for althou gh I had nothing peculiar in my dress —
but perhaps my countenance was more calm —it was easy to 
see that I excited many looks of hostility and defiance as being 
unknown and a suspect."  
August 1792 was indeed a month of events fraught 
with far -reaching conse quences. The decree went forth that all 
religious houses should be confiscated and sold. Along with 
the death -knell of royalty was sounded that of religion. Elise, 
the most determined and resolute of Napoleon's three sisters, 
was then at the College of St Cyr, and he felt it would not be 
safe for her to stay in France a single moment longer than was 
absolutely necessary. He still put family ties before patriotism; 
in reality each is part and parcel of the other. His position was 
difficult, for it would have  been foolish to have jeopardized his 
captaincy, but he thought he saw a way out, and applied for a 
commission which would insure his going to Corsica, which 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  22 was not granted. A petition to the Directory of the district of 
Versailles, requesting that he be allowed to accompany Elise, 
met with a more favourable response. On the 1st September, 
the day before the revolutionary Commune of Paris began the 
massacre of hundreds of citizens because they did not happen 
to sympathize fully with the Revolution, Napoleo n conducted 
his sister from St Cyr. In October they were in their native 
town once more, Napoleon resuming his duties as second 
lieutenant -colonel of the volunteers.  
The island of Sardinia, which is separated from Corsica 
by the Strait of Bonifacio and no w belongs to Italy, had 
cherished dreams of declaring her independence. It was 
therefore determined that Admiral Truguet and a number of 
troops and volunteers should sail from Marseilles, call at 
Ajaccio for additional men, and under the command of 
Raffael le Casabianca, endeavour to assist the rebellious 
islanders. Almost as soon as they had landed in Corsica there 
was trouble between the sailors and the unruly volunteers, 
three of the latter being hanged in consequence. Paoli, now 
President of the Administ ration and Commander -in-Chief of 
the National Guards, felt that this was indeed a sorry prelude 
to an expedition in which loyal co -operation was an absolute 
essential. The aged patriot therefore wisely decided that only 
regular troops should be sent. Cagli ari, the capital of the 
island, was deemed the most important point of attack; San 
Stefano was to be occupied by a second division under the 
command of Colonel Cesari -Colonna, Paoli's nephew, and 
accompanied by Napoleon. The attempt on the first place 
failed miserably owing to a want of confidence on the part of 
the besiegers, and the troops at San Stefano accomplished 
little. They certainly effected a landing, and on the night of the 
23rd February, 1793, Napoleon and his men hastily erected a 
battery, from  which point of vantage they proceeded to 
bombard Maddalena. On the following evening, however, the 
troops showed that they had no more heart for warfare than 
their compatriots at Cagliari, and a retreat became absolutely 
necessary. For this Napoleon is in  no way to be blamed. There is more than a suspicion of treachery, and it has been 
suggested that either Paoli or some of his followers had 
arranged that the expedition should fail in order to humble the 
too enterprising and over -confident Bonaparte, who w as 
nearly left behind in a disgraceful struggle to get into the 
boats.  
Napoleon's dream of a free Corsica had long since 
passed away; he was convinced that without France she might 
fall a prey to any Power or bold maritime adventurer who 
cared to risk the  attempt upon her. Relations between him and 
Paoli became more and more strained. Probably he felt in his 
own mind that the dictator's cause was hopeless, and 
consequently offered no advantages. France on the other hand, 
appeared likely to become all -power ful. She seemingly 
stopped at nothing, and was as bent on "setting Europe to 
rights "in her fashion as was Pitt in his. But what was of more 
immediate importance was the startling and unexpected 
intelligence that the Convention had ordered Paoli's arrest, as 
well as that of Pozzo, his right -hand man. The author of this 
ill-service was none other than Lucien Bonaparte, who had 
acted as Paoli's secretary for several months and was now in 
France occupying his leisure moments in securing the 
downfall of the pat riot by denouncing him to the authorities at 
Toulon. This conduct can only be described as infamous, and 
goes to prove that a keen sense of morality was not a 
conspicuous trait of the Bonaparte family. Lucien had not 
taken his brother into his confidence, and no one was more 
astonished than Napoleon when the truth of the matter was 
revealed to him. The net result was to embroil more deeply the 
island in a civil war which had been carried on in a desultory 
kind of way for some time, breaking out into flame h ere and 
there, and dying down almost as speedily.  
We now catch a glimpse of Napoleon as a diplomatist. 
He sent a communication to the Convention glowing with 
fulsome flattery and pleading that "the patriarch of liberty, and 
the precursor of the French Rep ublic," might be spared this 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  23 last ignominy. The young officer was playing a double part. 
With Salicetti he planned to secure the citadel of Ajaccio by 
artifice, but without success. He then decided to tramp to 
Bastia, where the French Commissioners were in vestigating 
the condition of affairs and making preparations for resistance 
against the islanders. Here he hoped to meet Joseph, who had 
also attached himself to the French cause. One cannot but 
admire the dogged determination which prompted such a 
proceed ing. His precept that "It is only by perseverance and 
tenaciousness that any object can be obtained," was not a mere 
moral maxim, a passing thought to be dismissed as casually as 
it had entered the brain.  
Napoleon's journey across the island was quite an 
adventurous one. Accompanied only by a poor but sagacious 
shepherd he traversed rugged ravines and valleys, every recess 
of which was dangerous and might shelter a band of Paolists. 
In passing through the village of Bocognano he fell into the 
hands of the enemy and was locked up in what was considered 
a safe place. But under cover of night, and by the aid of 
friends, he effected his escape through a window, and the 
whole of the following day he was forced to conceal himself in 
a garden. From this unhappy an d insecure hiding place he 
made his way to the house of a cousin, but on the evening of 
his third day there a Nationalist brigadier entered and 
demanded to search the place. Good fortune again attended the 
fugitive. The unwelcome visitor was cajoled into a  belief that 
Napoleon, against whom an order for arrest had now been 
issued, had neither been seen nor heard of in that quarter, and 
he did not persist in his demand. Shortly after he had left the 
house he was followed by the refugee, who had been sitting in 
another room with the servants, all of whom were sufficiently 
well armed to offer a desperate resistance if necessary.  
A ship was riding at anchor awaiting him, and, 
stealthily finding his way to the dinghy on the beach, 
Napoleon was quickly on board. It was a case of touch and go, for the Nationalists would not have allowed him to escape 
from their hands a second time.  
Eventually he reached Bastia, and made such a good 
impression on the Commissioners that a naval expedition 
against Ajaccio was fitted out and he was given command of 
the artillery. A week later the little band of some four hundred 
men sighted the harbour. The attempt to make the patriotic 
citizens surrender was a complete fiasco, for while Lacombe 
Saint Michel, Salicetti, Napoleon, and J oseph were joined by a 
few dozen soldiers and citizens, Paoli was being reinforced by 
people from all over the island. The men were disembarked, 
captured a fortress known as the Torre di Capitello, which they 
soon evacuated, and returned. Another failure h ad been added 
to Napoleon's record. The Bonaparte family paid dearly for the 
part they played at this time. Their enemies, and they were 
many, wrecked Madame Letizia's house. Fortunately her 
resourceful son had foreseen such an event, and not only 
warned h is mother but arranged for her escape. She and her 
children were thus enabled to leave the place before the angry 
Paolists set about their work of destruction, and after a long 
tramp were taken to Calvi by sea. Eight days after their arrival 
a small mercha nt vessel was chartered for a voyage to Toulon, 
and late on the night of the 11th June 1793, the dispossessed 
family, including Napoleon, sailed in the direction of France 
and of Fortune.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  24 CHAPTER VI 
NAPOLEON 'S FIRST FIGHT WITH THE ENGLISH  
(1793)  
The firs t six months of the year 1793 were notable 
ones in France. No more fortunate than many others who did 
not wear the imperial purple, the King paid for his 
incompetency with his head. Louis XVI. was one of those 
weak persons who mean well but carry their goo d intentions to 
no practical issue. His execution on the 21st January brought 
more important and far -reaching results than his thirty -eight 
years of life. Republican France, proclaimed on the 22nd 
September 1792, was no longer a mere dream of enthusiasts, 
but a reality, although the foundations were insecure and the 
superstructure top -heavy. The seed of liberty had been planted, 
and it was fondly hoped that it would bring forth an increase 
which would blossom in every country.  
In the previous April the luc kless Louis had been 
reluctantly compelled to declare war on Austria, the latter 
Power receiving the support of Prussia. The attempt on the 
part of the half -disciplined French troops under General 
Dumouriez to invade the Austrian Netherlands signally faile d. 
This poor beginning was amply retrieved at Valmy and by the 
seizure of the Netherlands after the battle of Jemappes on the 
6th of the following November. Savoy and the Rhine Valley 
were also occupied, and promises of assistance made to all 
countries tha t cared to raise the standard of revolt.  
With the execution of Louis XVI. monarchical Europe 
assumed a more threatening aspect. The Convention had 
already stated that its business was to drive out "tyrants "who 
occupied thrones, and such a proclamation wa s not pleasant 
reading for those whom it most concerned. Owing to an "attachment to the coalition of crowned heads "on the part of 
George III., France declared war against England on the 1st 
February 1793, and as the latter had allied herself to Holland, 
that country also received the same unwelcome challenge. The 
two Powers shortly afterwards joined hands with Russia, Spain 
and the Holy Roman Empire for the purpose of mutual 
support. France had more than her hands full, especially as she 
was in an unsettle d state within her own borders. The 
momentary triumphs of the Revolutionary troops did not last. 
The Convention supported the war in the Netherlands half -
heartedly, and so enraged Dumouriez that he deserted to 
Austria and subsequently retired to England, w here he spent 
his remaining days. Government passed into the hands of a 
select few known as the Committee of Public Safety. In the 
Convention were two parties, the Girondists or moderate 
republicans, and the Mountain, whose views were 
considerably more adv anced and far less reasonable. They 
could not rule themselves much less the nation. The Mountain 
prevailed, and the cause of the Girondists was taken up with 
enthusiasm by the people of La Vendee, a department of 
Brittany, which had no sympathy with the ex treme measures 
advocated by the Mountain. In company with several other 
populous centres Marseilles revolted, and it was to this city 
that the Bonapartes proceeded in September, 1793, after 
having led a dreary existence on the outskirts of Toulon. By 
this time affairs had quieted down again. Napoleon's sympathy 
was with the policy of the Mountain. Having been promoted to 
the position of capitaine commandant   he had joined his 
regiment at Nice in the previous June. He sent his family every 
sou he could spare  from his meagre pay, but this did not 
suffice to keep its members from actual want, and the proud 
Letizia and her children were obliged to eat the bread of 
charity. Gradually things took on a rosier complexion, and 
Joseph, Lucien, and Joseph Fesch, who wa s of the party, 
obtained positions which presumably left a small margin for 
the benefit of their sorely -stricken relations. It seemed as 
though Dame Fortune were indeed smiling when small 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  25 pensions from a fund which had been voted for Corsican 
refugees were  granted to the mother and each child under the 
age of fifteen.  
Being unable to get an appointment on active service, 
for which he ardently longed, Napoleon sought solace in 
literature. Had he failed in the army it is not at all improbable 
that he would h ave become a literary man; although it is 
doubtful if his achievements in this field would have made his 
name famous. For the moment he sheathed his sword and took 
up his pen, producing a pamphlet written in the form of a 
dialogue, entitled The Supper at B eaucaire . To quote the 
opinion of Sir John Seeley: "It is highly characteristic, full of 
keen and sarcastic sagacity, and of clear military views; but 
the temperature of its author's mind has evidently fallen 
suddenly; it has no warmth, but a remarkable cy nical 
coldness." It was published at Avignon in August 1793. Like 
his previous publications it attracted little or no attention in the 
days when printing presses were turning out pamphlets by the 
thousand, but as if to counterbalance the failure, Napoleon was 
about to have an opportunity to show his talents along the line 
they were slowly but surely developing.  
The inhabitants of the great southern seaport and 
arsenal of Toulon, the majority of them royalists to the core, 
had openly rebelled. Unlike those of Marseilles, who had 
raised an army against the Convention, they had gone so far as 
to call in the assistance of the enemy. English and Spanish 
fleets under Hood and Langara respectively, blockaded the 
harbour; in other words prevented or attempted to pr event the 
entry and exit of vessels; and troops which had been hastily 
landed were in command of the town. It soon became evident 
that the Convention would have to retake the place by force.  
The commander of the artillery having been wounded, 
Napoleon, no w chef de bataillon , was called upon to take his 
place. The army which he joined consisted of a motley crowd 
hastily gathered together. Trained officers were in the 
minority, for the simple reason that until the fall of Louis XVI. none but the nobility had  been allowed to hold a command. 
Their plebeian successors endeavoured to make up for a lack 
of military education by a zeal which was not infrequently 
manifested in the wrong place and at the wrong moment. For 
instance, Carteaux, originally an artist, hav ing been invested 
with the command of the army marching on Toulon and 
failing miserably, his place was taken by Doppet, a retired 
doctor who succeeded no better. Not until the amateurs had 
been tried and found wanting was the position given to 
Dugommier, a  veteran who had served with the colours for 
half a century, and who was to meet his death by a Spanish 
bullet in the following year.  
Modern authorities regard with suspicion the oft -
repeated assertion that Napoleon persuaded the Council of 
War to adopt t he plan he had drawn up for the purpose of 
capturing the wellnigh impregnable town. There is no doubt 
that he behaved with consummate bravery throughout the 
siege. He seemed to know instinctively what to do in a case of 
emergency. Examples could be multipl ied, but one must 
suffice. A soldier who was serving a big gun was struck 
lifeless while Napoleon was standing near. Without hesitation 
he took the dead man's place and proceeded to ram home the 
ammunition until another artilleryman stepped forward. He did  
not expect others to do what he feared to undertake himself, 
and he was never backward in appreciating bravery and 
resource in others.  
One day he was directing the construction of a battery 
when it became necessary for him to dictate a despatch. He 
calle d for some one to write it for him, and a young man 
named Junot offered to do so. A heavy shot came to earth 
within such a short distance of them that Junot was literally 
covered with dust. "Good," he exclaimed, "we shall not want 
sand this time," referrin g, of course, to the old method of 
blotting wet ink. Napoleon never forgot the incident, and Junot 
received his reward when Napoleon came into his own.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  26 Victor Perrin also came under the notice of Napoleon 
at the siege of Toulon. He was twice wounded, but stuck to his 
guns, which he fired with much skill.  
Having ordered a battery to be erected in an exposed 
position in the near vicinity of Fort Mulgrave, one of the most 
important of the English strongholds, Napoleon named this 
"the battery of the fearless. " His keen sense of the dramatic 
told him that henceforth it would be deemed an honour to be 
there, either dead or alive. Doppet says that "whenever he 
visited the outposts of the army, he was always sure to find the 
Commandant of Artillery at his post; he  slept little, and that 
little he took on the ground, wrapped in his mantle: he hardly 
ever quitted his batteries." Napoleon developed extraordinary 
initiative. He sent for the guns not in use by the Army of Italy, 
procured horses by requisition, establish ed a repair shop, 
ordered five thousand sand -bags to be made every day at 
Marseilles to be used for purposes of defence, and had a small 
army of smiths, wheelwrights, and carpenters at his command. 
"Nothing was done but by Bonaparte's orders or under his 
influence; everything was submitted to him," Marmont assures 
us. "He made tables of what was required; indicated how this 
was to be obtained; put everything in motion, and, in a week, 
gained an ascendancy over the Commissioners almost 
impossible to be conce aled."  
Fort Mulgrave, called by its besiegers "the little 
Gibraltar," was the key of the position, for it commanded the 
inner harbour. Before dawn on the morning of the 17th 
December, three columns of soldiers set out to reduce it, a 
previous attack havin g failed largely owing to the premature 
sounding of the retreat. Twice the attacking party was all but 
successful, and as a last resource the reserves under Napoleon 
were called up. Although his battalion was not the first to scale 
the walls, young Bonapar te and his men did magnificent work, 
and soon the guns which had been trained on the French were 
firing in the direction of the enemy. On the same day the 
Tricolour waved over two more forts which had been evacuated, the enemy finding Toulon untenable and resistance 
impossible in the face of the 37,000 men who were 
confronting them; the English, Spanish, Piedmontese and 
Neapolitan forces not numbering more than 17,200. Napoleon 
began to bombard the now doomed city and the fleet which 
still lay in the roadst ead. That night Sidney Smith, a gallant 
young English captain, with a little body of men equally brave, 
set fire to a dozen French ships in the harbour. The naval 
stores were soon well alight, the flames spreading with 
bewildering rapidity, and the Spaniar ds exploded two powder -
ships. On the 19th, Lord Hood in the Victory   weighed anchor, 
and the British fleet left the scene of disaster with over 14,000 
of the terror -stricken inhabitants on board, and four ships -of-
the-line, three frigates and several small er vessels as spoil.  
The luckless Toulonese paid heavily for their 
defection. For hours the city was given up to pillage, the 
Republican troops losing all restraint and refusing to listen to 
the humane pleadings of Dugommier. Nor was this all, for 
about 1 800 persons perished by the guillotine or were shot. 
The Reign of Terror was not confined to Paris.  
"Who is that little bit of an officer, and where did you 
pick him up?" some one is reported to have asked Dugommier. 
"That officer's name," was the reply, "is Napoleon Bonaparte. 
I picked him up at the Siege of Toulon, to the successful 
termination of which he eminently contributed, and you will 
probably one day see that this little bit of an officer is a greater 
man than any of us."  
It is certain that Dugo mmier was highly pleased with 
the conduct of his able lieutenant, indeed he "mentioned him 
in despatches," an honour for which every soldier longs. 
"Among those who distinguished themselves most," he writes, 
"and who most aided me to rally the troops and p ush them 
forward, are citizens Buona Parte, commanding the artillery, 
Arena and Cervoni, Adjutants -General." Generals Du Tell and 
Salicetti also said kind things of the Corsican. "Words fail me 
to describe Bonaparte's merit"; says the former, "to a mind 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  27 well stored with science, he brings great intelligence and 
unlimited courage. Such is a weak sketch of the qualities of 
this incomparable officer."  
For the services thus rendered Napoleon received 
another step in rank, and on the 1st February 1794, he becam e 
General of Brigade. His duties were to inspect the defences of 
the southern coast and to supervise the artillery and stores of 
the Army of Italy, commanded by General Scherer, whose 
headquarters were at Nice. Napoleon arrived at that town in 
the followin g March, and a month later was appointed General 
in Command of the Artillery.  CHAPTER VII 
NAPOLEON THE SOLDIER OF FORTUNE  
(1764 -1796)  
France resounded with the tramp of armed men. No 
fewer than five armies, largely made up of volunteers and 
probably numb ering nearly 700,000, in addition to those on 
garrison duty, were facing the enemies of the Republic. There 
was the Army of the North, of the Moselle, of the Rhine, of 
the West, and of Italy. It is interesting to note that many of 
those who held important positions in these forces were men 
who, like Carteaux and Doppet, had followed other trades or 
professions previous to the Revolution. By adapting 
themselves to circumstances, exercising ingenuity when their 
slight knowledge of tactics failed them, and pro ving their 
ability in the field, they had risen to positions of power and 
influence. Jourdan, with the Army of the North, had been a 
dealer in cloth; with the Army of the Moselle were Roche and 
Moreau, the former the son of an ostler, the latter once a 
lawyer in beautiful Brittany; Kleber, of the Army of the West, 
had been educated as an architect, while Massena, who was 
with the Army of Italy, had started life as a sailor. The promise 
of the Revolution to every son of France, "A career open to 
talent," was  not a mere boast, but was realised in many cases. 
Napoleon himself studied to make his soldiers feel that no 
rank was beyond their aspiration. There was a marshal's baton 
in every knapsack.  
Although Napoleon received an appointment in the 
Army of Italy i n the dual capacity of General of Artillery and 
Inspector -General, the opportunity of showing his now 
recognised abilities as an executant was denied him in this 
campaign. The chance came from another and an unexpected 
direction, namely that of diplomacy. It cannot be said that his 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  28 diplomatic attempts in Corsica had been particularly brilliant; 
this, however, did not preclude Augustin Robespierre, a 
Commissioner of the Convention with whom Napoleon had 
struck up an intimate acquaintance, from placing a diff icult 
problem requiring the greatest political skill and tact in his 
hands for solution. Genoa, once a great Sea Power, but now in 
the evening of her decline and decay, was supposed to be 
neutral, in other words, taking sides with none of the warring 
natio ns. But she had allowed enemies of France to pass 
through her territory, and by so doing had incurred the wrath 
of the mighty Republic, notwithstanding her excuse that she 
was not powerful enough to prevent them.  
To Genoa, the city of palatial buildings a nd gorgeous 
churches, Napoleon accordingly proceeded in July 1794, and 
so well did he manage his cause that his mission was 
completely successful. On the 28th of the same month he 
returned to the headquarters of the Army of Italy in the full 
expectation of  an ample recognition. His hopes were shattered 
by the astounding news that his friend and patron had been 
executed in company with his brother 1 \Iaximilien 
Robespierre, the cruel chief of the Jacobins.  
During the reign of the "Incorruptible," as the latt er 
was named by his friends and supporters, the streets of Paris 
ran with blood. By his orders, and those of his satellites, scores 
of prisoners were dragged daily from gaol and put to death. 
The flower of the Nobility of France suffered in company with 
the lowest of the low, for the guillotine was no respecter of 
persons.  
Napoleon found that his diplomatic triumph did not 
avail to prevent his arrest on account of what was held to be 
his suspicious conduct in connection with the Army of Italy, 
his recent m ission to Genoa, and his intimacy with the younger 
Robespierre, whose admiration had gone so far as to prompt a 
reference to Napoleon in a despatch to Government as "a man 
of transcendent merit." For a time his destiny hung in the 
balance. Had Salicetti, A lbitte and Laporte, the Commissioners of the Convention who examined his papers, 
cared to condemn him, the General in all probability would 
have met the same terrible fate as his friend. There is more 
than a suspicion that Salicetti now viewed Napoleon wit h 
jealousy, but, according to Marmont, he used his influence to 
procure his release. It is difficult to arrive at the truth in a 
matter such as this, when contemporary narrators do not agree. 
In history one must not take too much for granted, and perhaps 
it may be a reasonable conclusion to assume that Salicetti was 
not ignorant of the potential powers of his countryman, and 
that he recognised that no good could be done by condemning 
such a man, while much advantage might accrue to himself if 
he supported h im.  
Meanwhile the enterprising General was deprived of 
his rank. Instead of bemoaning his fate, Napoleon penned an 
energetic letter to his judges in which he defended his case on 
the grounds of his patriotism, his hatred of all tyrants, and his 
public ser vices. On the 20th August a counter -order was 
issued in which mention was made of the "advantages which 
might be derived from his military information and knowledge 
of localities, for the service of the Republic," and 
recommending that Citizen Bonaparte be  "restored 
provisionally to liberty, and that he should remain at 
headquarters pending further instructions from the Committee 
of Public Safety."  
Napoleon spent fourteen days in suspense at Fort 
Carre, near Antibes, but he was mercifully allowed a supply of 
books and maps which helped to pass the time. On the last day 
of his imprisonment an officer came at two o'clock in the 
morning to announce the pleasing intelligence that his release 
was ordered.  
"What! Are you not in bed yet?" he cried in 
astonishment  as he entered the cell and saw Napoleon poring 
over the litter of papers on the little table.  
"In bed!" was the contemptuous retort. "I have had my 
sleep, and am already risen."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  29 "What, so early?" the officer replied, amazed beyond 
measure at so unusual a statement.  
"Yes," continued the prisoner, "so early. Two or three 
hours of sleep are enough for any man."  
To use a familiar and expressive simile, Napoleon had 
now "jumped from the frying -pan into the fire." Although he 
was restored to his former rank he was not sent back to the 
army, but remained for a time unemployed, living with his 
family at Marseilles. While there he fell in love with 
Mademoiselle Desiree Clary, the daughter of a wealthy soap 
merchant, whose sister Julie had married Joseph Bonapart e. 
The enraptured lover went so far as to arrange for the wedding 
to take place in the following autumn. "Perhaps I am doomed 
to shine like a meteor," he told the object of his affection, "but 
I will ensure you a brilliant existence." Love's young dream 
was soon shattered by the disturbing spirit of ambition, and 
vowing eternal faithfulness Napoleon left his sorrowful 
sweetheart and promptly forgot his pledge. An expedition 
against Corsica, which had passed into the hands of the 
British, had been decided up on. In company with his brother 
Louis, now a sub -lieutenant of artillery, he set sail on the 3rd 
March 1795, and came near to being captured, two of the ships 
carrying the soldiers falling prey to the "ravening wolves of 
the sea," as Napoleon called Englis h sailors. The defeat 
sustained on this occasion added one more to his long list of 
disasters in connection with Corsican affairs.  
At the beginning of May he went to Paris to anticipate 
or await future events. He now resumed his friendship with 
Bourrienne , who had been in Germany. Offered an 
appointment as Brigadier -General of Infantry in the Army of 
the West, then engaged in putting down the civil war in La 
Vendee, he refused it on his usual plea of ill -health. In reality 
he considered it beneath his dign ity to accept the command. 
The Central Committee retaliated by having his name struck 
off the active list.  This displeasure was not to be of considerable 
duration. Napoleon turned his attention to the drawing up of a 
definite scheme of campaign for the Ar my of Italy, now 
meeting with rebuffs at the hands of the Austrians. The 
documents were sent to the Committee of Public Safety in 
July, and helped him to secure a staff appointment in the 
topographical department of the War Office, where he worked 
at plans  and operations for the benefit of the various French 
armies in the field. Incidentally he made the acquaintance of 
various people likely to be of use to him in the furtherance of 
his career, and renewing that with Barras whom he had first 
met at Toulon.  
Meantime Paris, well named the Gay City, had 
assumed something of its former aspect. There was marriage 
and giving in marriage, the theatres and other places of 
amusement opened anew, and the infallible barometer of 
business began to rise. Almost everywher e the half -trained 
armies had been victorious. Apparently "better times "had 
begun. The change in the political weather, although clearer, 
was not so noticeable. To be sure a constitution had been 
framed by the National Convention and was given to the worl d 
on the 22nd September 1795, but it did not give the universal 
satisfaction hoped for by the more enthusiastic of its 
supporters. In certain minor respects the Legislative Body 
upon which they had decided was not unlike our own 
Parliament, in so far as it  consisted of two Houses, the lower 
chamber being called the Council of Five Hundred and the 
upper chamber the Council of Ancients. The former drew up 
the laws, the latter passed, adjusted, or rejected them. From the 
two Councils a Directory of five men ve sted with the 
executive power was to be chosen, one of whom was to retire 
for re -election every year.  
Having decreed that one -third of the members of both 
Councils should also retire in the same way, either to be re -
elected or to surrender their places to  others, the Convention 
stirred up a hornet's nest for itself by deciding that two -thirds 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  30 of its members should be retained in the new Legislature, 
whereas it had originally assembled for the purpose of drawing 
up a constitution and not to govern. Girondis ts and supporters 
of the Mountain alike clung tenaciously to office, anxious to 
retain the spoils of victory. The members of the Convention 
soon found that public opinion was against them. "This 
measure," says Baron de Frenilly, "aroused general 
indignatio n, for nobody, apart from its accomplices, wished 
that it should possess either power or impunity."  
Paris was again in a ferment as serious as it was 
unexpected. The old battle cry of "Down with the aristocrats!" 
gave place to that of "Down with the two -thirds!" A rival 
government called the Central Committee was set up and 
almost as speedily suppressed by the regular troops, acting on 
the authority of the Convention. They met with more difficulty 
in attempting to disperse the insurgent electors of Paris, who 
had 30,000 National Guards on their side. General Menou, the 
commander of the troops, was taken prisoner, only to be put 
under arrest on his release by the party whom he had 
attempted to defend. The command was then given to Paul 
Barras, who among othe rs chose Napoleon as a lieutenant. He 
could not have selected a better man, as subsequent events 
proved. Barras ordered cannon from the Sablons camp, and the 
trained eye of his colleague enabled him to place them in the 
best possible positions to command t he various thorough -fares 
and bridges which led to the Tuileries, the building against 
which the National Guard and the citizens were marching. 
Napoleon had certainly not more than 7,000 armed men at his 
disposal, but his troops were victorious on the ever -memorable 
13th Vendemiaire (5th October 1795), and the "whiff of grape 
shot," as he termed it, helped materially to pave the way to the 
throne. For the present his skill was rewarded by the rank of 
second in command of the Army of the Interior, and later,  
when his friend Barras vacated the senior position, Napoleon 
received the appointment.  The National Convention could afford to be generous 
to the beardless young General who had saved the situation. It 
forthwith settled down to elect five Directors, name ly, La 
Reveilliere -Lepeaux, Letourneur, Rewbell, Carnot, and Barras.  
 
 
 
A RECEPTION  AT THE TUILERIES .  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  31 Napoleon now began to take an interest in Society. He 
frequ ented the Salons   where wit and beauty gathered for 
mutual admiration and intellectual entertainment. It is doubtful 
whether he cared for either to any considerable extent. 
Certainly he had no mock modesty, and realising more than 
ever the value of being o n speaking terms with those likely to 
be of service to him, he regarded the precious hours thus 
apparently wasted as a future asset. He preferred the Salon of 
Barras to any other. This led to his introduction to his future 
first wife, the fascinating Josep hine de Beauharnais, whose 
courtier husband had suffered the same fate as Robespierre 
during the Reign of Terror. Addison, the famous essayist, tells 
us that "a marriage of love is pleasant; a marriage of interest —
easy; and a marriage where both meet —happy ." Napoleon's 
matrimonial venture may be regarded as a judicious 
combination of the two, and to a certain extent it was happy. 
The marriage, which was not blessed by the Church, it being a 
Civil contract, took place on the 9th March 1796. The 
bridegroom wa s twenty -six years of age, his bride thirty -four.  
Ten days before Napoleon had been given command of 
the Army of Italy at the instigation of Carnot. Barras, in his 
Memoires , insinuates that his influence led the Directory to 
this decision. In reality the General had largely won his own 
case. His pen had not lost its cunning, and further plans which 
he had brought forward for a decisive campaign by the now 
moribund Army of Italy had attracted considerable attention, 
although when sent to Scherer, who had su cceeded 
Kellermann in the command, they met with a rebuff at the 
hands of that worthy. As a direct consequence he was 
superseded by the soldier who had dared to interfere.  
During his exile, when the glamour of his second 
marriage with the daughter of the Caesars had passed and the 
memory of better times was the bitter -sweet consolation of his 
turbulent mind, Napoleon frequently reflected on his affection 
for the vivacious woman who shared his first triumphs and his 
throne. "Josephine was devoted to me," he  tells Montholon, one of the little band of faithful followers who refused to 
desert him in the hour of failure. "She loved me tenderly; no 
one ever had a preference over me in her heart. I occupied the 
first place in it; her children the next; and she was  right in thus 
loving me; for she is the being whom I have most loved, and 
the remembrance of her is still all -powerful in my mind."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  32 CHAPTER VIII  
"THE SPARK OF GREAT AMBITION " 
(1796)  
"Soldiers! you are ill -fed and almost naked; the 
Government owes you mu ch, but can do nothing for you. Your 
patience, your courage, do you honour, but bring you neither 
advantage nor glory. I am about to lead you into the most 
fertile plains of the world. Rich provinces, great cities will be 
in your power. There you will find  honour, and fame, and 
wealth. Soldiers of the Army of Italy, will you be found 
wanting in courage?"  
Thus Napoleon addressed the half -starved and dejected 
legions who had been struggling for two years on the Maritime 
Alps against the Austrians and Sardini ans in an apparently 
impossible attempt to gain a footing in Northern Italy. The 
army was little more than a mob of malcontents, lacking even 
the common necessaries of life. Forty thousand outcasts, if you 
will, undisciplined, many of them without boots, m ore of them 
in tatters, all of them with scarcely a ray of hope; soldiers in 
name rather than in reality. Brave men and heroes there were, 
order and subordination there were not. To introduce cohesion 
and discipline into these unruly forces was the almost 
superhuman task Napoleon had undertaken.  
He arrived at Nice, the headquarters of the Army of 
Italy, on the 26th March 1796; he began to investigate the 
conditions of his problem the same day, issuing the above 
General Orders twenty -four hours afterwards. His allies were 
the mountains which separated him from his enemies; the 
Mediterranean which faced him was the highroad of the 
English squadron. A concerted effort on the part of the land 
and the maritime forces would most assuredly catch him like a rat in a trap. Fortunately the Austrians and Sardinians were 
suspicious of each other, their dispositions were faulty and not 
always in concert, and their forces were scattered over a long 
line of territory, defending the passes across the mountains. 
The officers  viewed the Directory's choice of a commander 
with suspicion. If Scherer, a veteran over seventy years of age, 
had not been able to lead them to victory, what could be 
expected of this fledgling? They reckoned without their host. 
Genius knows no age and ta kes no count of birthdays. 
Napoleon's amazing fertility of resource, his astounding 
energy and thorough grip of the situation, gradually overcame 
their opposition whether acknowledged or only felt. Massena, 
Augereau, Serurier, Cervoni, La Harpe, and Rampon , to 
mention some of the more important, joined loyal hands with 
Napoleon's own chosen men, Murat, Berthier, Duroc, 
Marmont, and the fear -nothing Junot. We shall find many of 
these names occurring again and again, as the story develops 
and the career of th e Master General expands. Few, if any, 
individuals succeed unaided, least of all the soldier and the 
statesman. Napoleon early recognised that the so -called self -
made man is very rarely entitled to the credit implied in the 
name. He fostered the ambitions of his colleagues, but saw to 
it that he was the chief gainer by them.  
After having provided so far as was possible for the 
creature comforts of the troops and raised their drooping 
spirits by his enthusiasm and the promise of good things to 
come, the com mander prepared to strike a quick and decisive 
blow at his enemies. The armies of the King of Sardinia and 
Piedmont and of the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire were 
not-united in one large body, but separated by more than thirty 
miles. The central idea of this arrangement was that in case of 
necessity each could fall back on the capital of the country 
they were defending, the Austrians on Milan and the 
Sardinians on Turin. The wiser way, as Viscount Wolseley 
points out, would have been to concentrate at a p lace 
commanding both cities, in the valley of the Eastern Bormida, 
for instance. Napoleon saw the folly of the plan, and 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  33 determined to force his way between the two armies and fight 
them separately. "United," as he said, "the two forces would 
have been sup erior to the French army: separated, they were 
lost." Napoleon hurried troops along the rut -wrinkled road to 
Voltri, within easy march of Genoa, to give the impression 
that the latter place was about to be attacked. Meantime, 
however, he and the main body encamped at the foot of the 
mountains, above Savona. After strongly fortifying the pass of 
Montenotte, the Austrians occupying a ridge above the village 
of that name, he prepared to attack, and on the 12th April took 
the enemy completely by surprise. The o nset was deadly, the 
result certain. Massena bore the brunt of the fight, the 
commander contenting himself with the highly important duty 
of preventing the enemy from reaching their Sardinian allies. 
The Imperialists were driven from the field with a loss of 700 
dead and wounded. "My title of nobility," said Napoleon, 
"dates from the battle of Montenotte." Another Austrian defeat 
took place at Millesimo on the following day, and they were 
also ousted from the village of Dego, upon which they had 
fallen back , on the 14th.  
Early on the morning of the 15th, an Austrian division, 
unaware of the disaster which had overtaken their comrades, 
seized Dego. Had not Napoleon acted with great promptitude, 
they might possibly have retrieved the defeat of the previous 
day. While Massena and La Harpe bravely disputed the 
ground, Napoleon brought up reinforcements with an energy 
which alone saved the occasion. Having shattered this army, 
the Commander -in-chief turned his attention to the Sardinians 
at Ceva, under Colli, and  at first met with a rebuff. Hoping to 
catch Napoleon in a trap, the enemy's camp was hastily broken 
up and the army marched off to occupy what the General 
fondly imagined were stronger positions. Defeat awaited them, 
however, at the hands of Serurier and Dommartin, who came 
up with the Sardinians and forced them to fly towards Turin, 
their base of supplies. The town of Mondovi fell to the French, 
Marmont captured Cherasco. As a result of these operations, 
Savoy and Nice were ceded to France and the Austro -Sardinian alliance came to an abrupt end. The important 
fortresses of Coni, Tortona, and Alessandria were surrendered 
to the French and others were demolished. These strategic 
positions have been called "the keys of the Alps," and were 
necessary to the suc cess of Napoleon's next operations. The 
Commissioners who represented Sardinia would not willingly 
grant demands which they held to be extortionate and which 
left but two fortified places worthy of consideration to the 
dismembered State. Napoleon told them  that it was for him to 
make conditions. "Listen to the laws which I impose upon you 
in the name of the Government of my country," he added, "or 
to-morrow my batteries are erected, and Turin is in flames." 
Arguments which can be backed by deeds are unanswe rable. 
Parma, also on the losing side, likewise sued for peace, the 
arrangement being that she should furnish specie and supplies 
for the French army. Napoleon during the course of his 
negotiations made use of a striking phrase which explains 
another of th e secrets of his success. "It may happen to me to 
lose battles," he remarked, "but no one shall ever see me lose 
minutes either by over -confidence or by sloth."  
Having concluded his diplomatic measures, the 
General was now ready to turn his attention to h is remaining 
enemy. Before doing so he thought it well to make a further 
appeal to the patriotic instincts of his troops. Triumphant as 
never before, they were nevertheless beginning to weary of the 
ceaseless marching and fighting:  
"Soldiers! you have gai ned in fifteen days six victories, 
taken twenty -one standards, fifty -five pieces of cannon, many 
strong places, and conquered the richest part of Piedmont. You 
have made fifteen thousand prisoners, and killed or wounded 
ten thousand men. Hitherto you have fought on barren rocks, 
illustrious, indeed, by your courage, but of no avail to your 
country. Now you rival by your services the Armies of 
Holland and of the Rhine. You were utterly destitute; you have 
supplied all your wants. You have gained battles with out 
cannon; passed rivers without bridges; made forced marches 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  34 without shoes; bivouacked without bread! The phalanxes of 
the Republic —the soldiers of liberty —were alone capable of 
such sacrifices. But, soldiers, you have accomplished nothing 
while anything  remains to be done. Neither Turin nor Milan is 
in your hands; the ashes of the conqueror of Tarquin are still 
trampled on by the assassins of Basseville! I am told that there 
are some among you whose courage is failing, who would 
rather return to the summ its of the Alps and the Appenines. 
No—I cannot believe it. The conquerors of Montenotte, of 
Millesimo, of Dego, of Mondovi burn to carry still further the 
glories of the French name! But, ere I lead you to conquest, 
there is one condition you must promise to fulfil; that is, to 
protect the people whom you liberate, and to repress all acts of 
lawless violence. Without this, you would not be the 
deliverers, but the scourge of nations. Invested with the 
national authority, strong in justice and law, I shall no t hesitate 
to enforce the requisitions of humanity and of honour. I will 
not suffer robbers to sully your laurels. Pillagers shall be shot 
without mercy.  
"People of Italy! the French army advances to break 
your chains. The French people are the friends of  all nations. 
In them you may confide. Your property, your religion, your 
customs shall be respected. We will only make war as 
generous foes. Our sole quarrel is with the tyrants who enslave 
you!"  
Without losing unnecessary time, Napoleon entered 
Piacenza , crossed the river Po on a hastily -constructed bridge 
of boats in face of a hostile force, and prepared to take the 
village of Fombio. Here some 5,000 Austrian infantry and 
cavalry were prepared to make a stand. The place literally 
bristled with artillery , even the churches were fortified; but the 
French routed the enemy, and the Imperialists were forced to 
retire.  
Behind the swiftly -flowing Adda a strong rearguard 
was posted, and on the 10th May Napoleon appeared at Lodi, 
on the opposite bank. A narrow b ridge, some 200 yards in length and thirty feet wide, was the only means of crossing the 
turbulent stream. At first the Austrians tried to hold the 
structure, then attempted to break it down, but the steady fire 
of the French prevented them from doing so. To cross to the 
opposite bank was absolutely essential for a decisive action, 
and Napoleon gave orders that a column of picked men should 
be sent to seize the bridge. He was told that such an attempt 
could not possibly succeed. "Impossible!" he is asserted  to 
have cried, "that word is not French!" He started the column. It 
meant certain death to many, but in warfare men are simply 
fighting machines controlled by the human dynamo at their 
head. The troops pressed forward. Those in front fell like 
leaves in a utumn, as the shots from the opposite shore 
ploughed their ranks. Some of the most daring reached the 
middle of the bridge only to sink in a lifeless heap under the 
murderous hail. A retreat seemed inevitable, the bravest 
wavered.  
Napoleon, quick to notic e the slightest sign of 
weakness, again urged his troops forward. Lannes, Massena, 
and Berthier, threw themselves into the thick of the fight, and 
shortly afterwards the bridge was carried. The rest was 
comparatively easy. The Austrian cannon were taken, t he 
infantry which covered them was forced to give way, and the 
Imperialists again retreated, leaving 300 dead and wounded. It 
was in very truth a hard -fought field, for the victors lost a 
greater number of men. Had they been able to follow the 
retreating a rmy, the triumph would have been complete. 
Napoleon declared that "it was not till after the terrible passage 
of the Bridge of Lodi that the idea flashed across my mind that 
I might become a decisive actor in the political arena. Then 
arose, for the first time, the spark of great ambition." It was 
after this battle that the soldiers nicknamed Napoleon "the 
little corporal." Sebottendorf, who commanded the defeated 
troops, bent his steps towards Mantua, to which Beaulieu, his 
superior officer, was also makin g his way.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  35 CHAPTER IX 
THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGN  
(1796 -1797)  
On the 15th May 1796, the conqueror and his troops 
entered Milan, the Austrians retiring behind the banks of the 
Mincio, a river inseparably associated with the history of the 
Roman Empire. He encour aged the soldiers by telling them 
that they had overwhelmed and dispersed everything which 
had opposed their progress, that the Republic had ordered 
fetes  to be given in honour of the victories, and that on their 
return home "fellow citizens will say of e ach of you in 
passing: 'He was a soldier in the Army of Italy!' "He did not 
minimize the task before them, however, and bluntly asserted 
that much still remained to be done. "To restore the Capitol (at 
Rome); to replace there the statues of the heroes who have 
rendered it immortal; to rouse the Romans from centuries of 
slavery—such will be the fruit of our victories: they will form 
an era in history; to you will belong the glory of having 
changed the face of the most beautiful part of Europe." Such a 
procla mation was well calculated to inspire the inhabitants 
with ideas of liberty as well as to encourage soldiers still 
flushed with victory. The satisfaction of the people at these 
honied words, however, gave way to consternation when the 
news was noised abroa d that 20,000,000) ?> francs was the 
price of peace, to say nothing of free supplies for the troops. A 
futile flicker of resistance was shown by some of the more 
patriotic folk of Lombardy, who backed their opinions by 
force and came to blows with the pret ended "liberators "at 
Milan and at Pavia. The retribution which followed swiftly, 
did not encourage other towns to rise; the Italian national spirit 
was but a weak thing then. The village of Brescia, although on 
Venetian and therefore neutral territory, wa s razed to the ground by fire. Napoleon himself marched on Pavia, which 
was carried by assault and sacked. Again Beaulieu attempted 
to check Napoleon, but he might as well have tried to prevent 
the sun from rising. The Austrians were defeated at Valeggio, 
Verona was entered by Massena, and Napoleon prepared to 
lay siege to the well -fortified town of Mantua, the key to 
Austria and Italy. Fifteen thousand troops were detailed for the 
purpose in addition to those who were to guard their 
communications. After c ompelling the insurrectionists at 
Milan to surrender, he entered Modena and Bologna, and sent 
Murat to Leghorn, thus violating the neutral territory of 
Tuscany.  
But Napoleon was not to have it all his own way. The 
Austrians having revived their drooping s pirits, were bent on 
making a last desperate resistance, and for a time it looked 
very much as though success would attend their efforts. They 
discomfited the French on more than one occasion, but instead 
of concentrating they fell into the fatal error of distributing 
their forces over a large area, and were thus precluded from 
striking decisive blows and following up their victories. 
Napoleon, equally determined, and much more wary, decided 
on a bold stroke. In order to secure the greatest possible 
number of troops, he raised the blockade of Mantua, which 
fortress was entered by Wurmser, Beaulieu's successor, on the 
1st August. After having gained a victory at. Lonato Napoleon 
barely escaped capture. Lie and a garrison of some 1200 men 
were summoned to surr ender by a corps of 4000 Austrians. 
The envoy, bearing a flag of truce, was led to Napoleon 
blindfolded, as is the custom. When the bandage was removed 
the Commander coolly asked him, "What means this 
insolence?" and added that he was in the middle of the French 
Army! The envoy was so overcome with fright that he told his 
superior officer more fiction than fact. Lonato was occupied 
by French troops, he assured him, and if the corps did not lay 
down their arms in ten minutes they would be shot. They 
preferre d the less unpleasant expedient. Their feelings, when 
they discovered the clever trick which had been played on 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  36 them, can be better imagined than described. On the same day 
Augereau, after considerable difficulty and much hard 
fighting, secured the importa nt strategic position of 
Castiglione.  
On the 5th August 1796, Wurmser and Napoleon 
fought the battle of Medola. A lull followed the retreat of the 
Imperialists after this action, both sides utilizing the time in 
repairing or attempting to repair the injur ies sustained by 
them. Napoleon advanced to Verona, and Mantua was relieved 
by Wurmser. Davidovich, the Austrian commander's 
colleague, met with defeat near Calliano, and Napoleon was 
thereby enabled to enter Trent, the capital of the Italian Tyrol. 
Shortl y afterwards Wurmser himself was defeated by Massena 
near Bassano, Napoleon again having a narrow escape from 
capture as the Austrians retreated upon Mantua.  
The Imperialists had now been reinforced and 
numbered some 60,000 troops. The force at Napoleon's  
disposal did not exceed 42,000, including the 8000 engaged in 
watching Mantua, who were therefore not available for more 
active co -operation at the front. On the 8th October 1796, he 
confided to the Directory that the situation was critical, that 
everythi ng was going wrong in Italy, and appealed for further 
soldiers and more skilful diplomatic measures. The 
seriousness of his position became particularly evident in the 
following month, when Napoleon was forced to retreat owing 
to Vaubois' defeat in Tyrol. He told the soldiers without 
reserve that he was displeased with them, and even went so far 
as to say that he would have the standards of two of their 
regiments emblazoned with the words, "They are no longer of 
the Army of Italy." At Arcola on the 15th Nov ember, the 
Imperialist and Republican forces contested the ground with 
feverish and amazing energy, and as at Lodi, Napoleon 
behaved with conspicuous bravery. He carried a standard half 
way across the bridge, and was only prevented from 
proceeding further,  amidst a hail of shot, by some grenadiers. 
Fearing for his life, they compelled him to return to a safer position. As it was, the brave fellows and their commander 
were pushed into the marsh by a body of the enemy who, 
taking advantage of the confusion, w ere crossing from the 
Austrian side. Napoleon was dragged out of the marsh by his 
brother Louis and Marmont.  
When night closed in upon the armies victory rested 
with the Austrians. The battle was renewed, however, on the 
following day, and on the third th e tide turned in Napoleon's 
favour. The repulse had robbed him of some of the sweets of 
conquest, but his worn -out soldiers knew that they had 
regained the confidence of their commander, and slept the 
sleep of the contented as they lay around their bivouac  fires.  
 
 
 
"IT IS THE EMPEROR !"  
There is an oft -told story of this period which 
illustrates the alertness of Napoleon and shows how he could 
make allowances for  human nature on occasions. One of the 
French sentries was discovered by Napoleon fast asleep at his 
post. The poor fellow had been harassed by frequent duty, and 
luckily Napoleon was in a sympathetic mood. He took the 
soldier's musket and stood patiently by, with tireless eyes, until 
he awoke. The man's consternation may be imagined when he 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  37 saw who had been keeping watch in his place. He prepared for 
the worst, but, to his immense relief, Napoleon forgave him.  
For two months affairs were at a standstill. 
Negotiations were begun and ended in a fierce war of words 
which settled nothing. Meantime fresh troops joined both 
forces, and when Napoleon became aware that the Austrians 
were concentrated not far from Rivoli, he was ready to throw 
the full force of his  army upon them, although it was the 
weaker by nearly 10,000 men. On the 14th January 1797, the 
awful battle of Rivoli was fought. At the commencement some 
of the French regiments wavered under the Austrian attack, 
Massena losing his temper so far as to st rike several of the 
officers with the flat of his sword. While the fate of the day 
still hung in the balance a division of his troops was brought 
up, and the enemy found themselves engaged in a very 
determined manner. But try as they might to overthrow the  
white -coats, the French could not do so. The position became 
so desperate at last, that Napoleon had recourse to a stratagem 
which alone saved his army from disaster. It was all but 
surrounded by the Imperialists when, pretending that 
important despatches  had just arrived from the seat of 
Government with reference to proposed negotiations between 
the conflicting parties, Napoleon sent a flag of truce to General 
Alvintzy. While Junot talked to the Austrian commander, 
Napoleon quietly re -arranged his forces.  The conference broke 
up, as Napoleon intended, without result, and soon the 
combatants were again in action. The day ended in the triumph 
of the French.  
Much remained to be done. Under Napoleon's 
command many of the weary soldiers were forced to march 
towards Mantua, in the direction of which Provera was 
hastening to raise the siege. The keen eyes of a sergeant who 
was engaged in the homely occupation of chopping wood at 
Fort George saved that French stronghold, in the early 
morning of the 15th January 17 97. A regiment of the enemy's 
hussars, dressed somewhat like the French, misled the garrison of Fort George into the belief that they were friends come to 
their relief. The veteran gave the alarm before the Austrian 
hussars could make good their entry, and  the drawbridge was 
hauled up and the enemy held in check while reinforcements 
were approaching. On the following day Napoleon drew near 
Mantua, and at La Favorita brought the Austrians to battle. 
Aided by the superb daring of Victor, whose achievements at  
Toulon have been noticed earlier, he forced Provera and some 
6000 men to lay down their arms. It was one of the most 
brilliant achievements in the whole of this terrible campaign, 
and a fitting conclusion to the siege of Mantua, which 
capitulated on the 2 nd February. For many a long day the 
regiment commanded by Victor was know as "The Terrible," a 
name it richly deserved.  
Napoleon, aided by Joubert and Massena, followed 
rapidly on the heels of the residue of the defeated army and 
gave it no rest. Pope Pi us VI. having made himself 
objectionable by stirring up strife, the Commander -in-chief 
turned towards Florence preparatory to marching on Rome. 
The latter, however, became unnecessary, as a humiliating 
peace was signed at Tolentino on the 19th February 179 7, by 
the terms of which the Pope was compelled to pay 30,000,000 
francs, and to cede a considerable portion of territory, and 
various valuable works of art. The French, moreover, gained 
certain military and maritime advantages.  
The contest with Austria c ontinued to occupy the 
French, the Imperialists now being under the command of the 
Archduke Charles, the Emperor's brother. Finding himself in 
an awkward situation, Napoleon agreed to a suspension of 
hostilities, and preliminaries of peace were signed at L eoben 
on the 18th April, 1797, preparatory to the Treaty of Campo 
Formio on the 17th October. Dr J. Holland Rose thus 
summarizes the terms of the latter: "Austria ceded to the 
French Republic her Belgic provinces. Of the once extensive 
Venetian possessions  France gained the Ionian Isles, while 
Austria acquired Istria, Dalmatia, the districts at the mouth of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  38 the Cattaro, the city of Venice, and the mainland of Venetia as 
far west as Lake Garda, the Adige, and the lower part of the 
River Po. The Hapsburgs rec ognised the independence of the 
now enlarged Cis -alpine Republic. . . . The Emperor ceded to 
the dispossessed Duke of Modena the territory of Breisgau on 
the east of the Rhine."  
Having so successfully played the parts of conqueror 
and diplomatist Napoleon  went to Rastatt. One might have 
imagined that the journey was the triumphal progress of an 
Emperor. Feted by townsfolk and cheered by peasants as he 
went, the enthusiasm expressed might well have turned his 
head but that Napoleon had learnt his lessons in  the hard 
school of experience. Bourrienne remarked on the admiration 
shown, that it must be delightful to be so greeted. "Bah!" 
Napoleon replied with disgust, "this same unthinking crowd, 
under a slight change of circumstances, would follow me just 
as eag erly to the scaffold." The Reign of Terror and his 
intimacy with the younger Robespierre were too recent for 
their moral to be forgotten. From Rastatt he proceeded to 
Paris.  
It is fortunate that a contemporary, who saw Napoleon 
at this time, has committed  his observations to paper. "I beheld 
with deep interest and extreme attention that extraordinary 
man," he writes, "who has performed such great deeds, and 
about whom there is something which seems to indicate that 
his career is not yet terminated. I found  him much like his 
portraits, small in stature, thin, pale, with an air of fatigue, but 
not, as has been reported, in ill -health. He appeared to me to 
listen with more abstraction than interest, as if occupied rather 
with what he was thinking of, than with  what was said to him. 
There is great intelligence in his countenance, along with an 
expression of habitual meditation, which reveals nothing of 
what is passing within. In that thinking head, in that daring 
mind, it is impossible not to suppose that some d esigns are 
engendering which will have their influence on the destinies of 
Europe."  The magnificent reception accorded to Napoleon by 
the Directory in the Luxembourg on the 10th December 1797 
surpassed all others. Madame de Stael, that witty woman 
whom Na poleon detested because of her meddling in politics, 
tells us that "Bonaparte arrived, dressed very simply, followed 
by his aides -de-camp, all taller than himself, but nearly bent 
by the respect which they displayed to him. M. de Talleyrand, 
in presenting Bonaparte to the Directory, called him 'the 
Liberator of Italy, and the Pacificator of the Continent.' He 
assured them that 'General Bonaparte detested luxury and 
splendour, the miserable ambition of vulgar souls, and he 
loved the poems of Ossian particula rly, because they detach us 
from the earth.' "Napoleon, who had a keen sense of the 
dramatic, knew very well that the plainer he dressed on such 
an occasion the more conspicuous he would be in a crowd of 
such magnificence. One sentence of his short but tel ling 
speech is worthy of notice: "From the peace you have just 
concluded," he said, "dates the era of representative 
governments." In a certain sense this was true, notwithstanding 
that his own despotism was destined to have its day.  
Napoleon was now give n command of the so -called 
Army of England, which the Government fondly hoped would 
plant its standards on the banks of the Thames. The general 
soon dispelled this delusion. The time was not yet come for his 
gigantic preparations to subdue "perfidious Albi on." The 
glamour of the East beckoned him. "All great fame comes 
from that quarter," he told Bourrienne. An expedition to Egypt 
and the restoration of French rule in India were more to his 
liking at the moment and offered more possibilities of 
enhanced fam e. Not slow to read the signs of the times, and 
knowing the Directors were jealous of his reputation, 
Napoleon felt that an absence from France might have the 
desired effect of showing how very useful he was to the 
Republic.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  39 CHAPTER X 
THE EXPEDITION TO EGYPT  
(1798)  
There is no more romantic phase of Napoleon's career 
than that of his expedition to the sunny land of the Pharaohs. 
He has himself told us that "Imagination rules the world," and 
although he was essentially practical by nature, a man who 
invari ably worked out his plans to almost fractional details, 
whenever practicable, his ardent Southern temperament 
readily responded to the glow and glamour of the Orient. 
There history had been made, there history was to be made. He 
saw vast possibilities in t he slumbering East, perhaps an 
awakening into prodigious activity under the rule of a military 
dictator with liberal ideas. He might revitalize Asia as he had 
revivified some of the moribund States of worn -out Europe. 
Briefly his object was to conquer Egyp t, oust the British from 
India, where their rule was by no means consolidated, and on 
his return, crush the power of the Sultan. Everything seemed 
to favour him in engineering the machinery of this vast 
project. The scientists of France took up the scheme with 
avidity, and learned members of the Institute, to which he had 
been admitted in the place of Carnot, gave him the benefit of 
their researches.  
The notion of the expedition was not a sudden 
inspiration, acted upon on the spur of the moment. So far n 
back as the 10th August 1797, when affairs in Italy were still 
far from settled, Napoleon had mentioned the subject to the 
Directory, following it up by a lengthy letter a month later. He 
now reasoned it out, read travel books, examined maps, 
interrogated m en of accurate knowledge, brooded over it in the 
solitude of the study, and mentally weighed the chances of success and failure. The scales turned in its favour, and 
Napoleon determined to rival the doings of Alexander.  
Before long, extensive preparations  were going on 
apace at Toulon, Genoa, Ajaccio, and Civita Vecchia. It was 
eminently necessary that Great Britain, which was still at war 
with France and had commanded the sea since the Tudor Navy 
had broken the giant power of Spain, should be deceived as to 
the destination of the fleets. As a subterfuge the so -called 
Army of England solemnly paraded, marched, and counter -
marched. Those who were not in the secret thought the 
soldiers were awaiting the signal to embark for England, but it 
became evident as t ime passed that offensive operations 
against the English were not intended, some of the smartest 
battalions being gradually drafted into a newly -formed Army 
of Egypt. Everything was done with as much secrecy and 
celerity as possible; the meetings of the Di rectory, when the 
project was under discussion, were held with closed doors. It 
is significant that the cost was largely defrayed by plunder and 
forced contributions from the long -suffering Swiss.  
A magnificent fleet was fitted out at Toulon, and when 
all the convoys at the various ports already mentioned had 
been concentrated, it reached a total of thirteen battle -ships, 
fourteen frigates, seventy -two corvettes, and nearly four 
hundred smaller craft, chiefly merchant vessels. Even with this 
great armament  there was overcrowding, for quarters had to be 
found for no fewer than 35,000 troops. In addition there were 
over a hundred members of the Commission of the Arts and 
Sciences, all of whom were liberally provided with 
instruments and books likely to be of service in the warfare 
against ignorance and the intellectual conquest of the East. 
The admiral in command was Brueys, who had weathered the 
battle and the breeze for many a long year, the generals were 
the pick of the French Army, doughty champions of the  
Republic and reliable upholders of Napoleon's supreme 
command; Kleber, Desaix, Berthier, Murat, Menou, Lannes, 
Andreossi, to mention a few of the more prominent.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  40 Good fortune attended the expedition at the outset, and 
it was regarded as of good augury th at Nelson's reconnoitring 
squadron had been forced to retire by a gale and obliged to 
make for Sardinia, and that the morning of departure was 
sunny and cloudless. The Fates were surely with the French! 
For good or evil, the armada left Toulon on the 19th May 
1798, picking up the vessels lying in other ports, as it 
proceeded eastward. Napoleon, accompanied by the savants , 
sailed on l'Orient , reputed to be the finest three -decker afloat. 
Malta was the first object of conquest, or rather of aggression. 
The Kn ights of St John, to whom the island belonged, 
surrendered quietly and without opposition. A Judas had been 
found willing to sell the once great Order which had fought the 
infidel and the Turk in the Holy Land, before Napoleon had 
put his foot on shore. Ha ving garrisoned the island, planned an 
incredible number of reforms within a week, and replenished 
his coffers, Napoleon gave orders for the anchors to be 
weighed. The monotonous voyage was continued; monotonous 
because the lust of conquest coursed through  the veins of 
commander and men alike, and they were impatient to be in 
action, so long as it was not action against Nelson, who was to 
be avoided at any cost.  
Napoleon was not a good sailor, and passed most of the 
time in his cabin reading, one of the wo rks in his travel -ling 
library being Cook's Voyages . Sometimes he would talk over 
nautical matters with Brueys, or discuss abstruse subjects with 
one or other of the scientists. One fine night on deck he 
pointed to the stars, and said: "You may talk as lon g as you 
please, gentlemen, but who made all that?" He lost no time, 
availed himself of every opportunity of adding to his already 
extensive knowledge of the East, and was as energetic 
mentally as an athlete is physically.  
On the 1st July the sandy shore of Alexandria was 
sighted, and in the evening disembarkation began. It was a 
long and trying task to hoist the horses from the holds and land 
the heavy artillery, ammunition wagons, supplies, and the thousand and one impedimenta of warfare, but by the 
following morning the task was accomplished. Napoleon had 
already counselled moderation in his soldiers, telling them to 
respect the Mohammedan religion and those who represented 
it as well as the national customs. The conquest they were 
about to undertake was  to be "fraught with incalculable effect 
upon the commerce and civilization of the world." Having 
secured the city after a short fight, in which the 
Mohammedans behaved with traditional daring, Napoleon 
issued a proclamation to the people to the effect tha t he had 
come to restore their rights and their religion, and to punish 
the usurpers, namely the Mamelukes. He said harsh things of 
the savage hordes who held the country in terror, threatening 
dire results to those who should join their marauding forces 
against the French. "For them there will be no hope; they shall 
perish!"  
He infused new life into the sleepy civic institutions of 
Alexandria, gave orders for the repair of the age -worn 
fortifications, and for the erection of new batteries as well as 
for b uilding factories and schools. In less than a week he was 
ready to make a move in the direction of Cairo, leaving 3000 
men at Alexandria under Kleber, who had been wounded in 
the preliminary brush with the Mamelukes.  
A march across sixty miles of burning sand was but the 
beginning of the hardships these tried soldiers of fortune were 
to endure in a land which neither provided water nor flowed 
with milk and honey. It seemed more like the abomination of 
desolation. Parched, footsore, dispirited, soldiers and  officers 
alike drew invidious comparisons between the barren deserts 
of Egypt and the fertile plains of Lombardy. The die was cast; 
there was nothing to do but to follow the leader who 
frequently walked at the head of the columns supporting the 
same disco mforts with cheerful fortitude. Attacks by bands of 
Mamelukes occasionally created a diversion and thinned the 
ranks. A cloud of dust in the distance would put the army on 
the defensive. Presently little specks would emerge which 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  41 ultimately would resolve t hemselves into horses and riders. A 
short, sharp tussle and again the wild warriors would be flying 
over the sand on their swift Arab steeds. The troops soon 
became inured to this kind of warfare and learnt to meet it by 
forming into squares which the nati ve cavalry, however swift 
their onslaught, could not pierce. When the army reached the 
banks of the Nile the whole aspect of the country changed and 
the soldiers took fresh courage.  
At last the minarets of Cairo glimmered through the 
haze. The city boaste d a population of many thousands, and 
their task -masters were prepared to sell their lives dearly in its 
defence. Near the Pyramids, those monuments of ancient 
greatness, the army halted. "Soldiers!" Napoleon cried, "from 
those summits forty centuries cont emplate your actions." A 
more pregnant sentence cannot be conceived; it acted on the 
soldiers like a stimulant. There was difficult work to do, for 
the city was intrenched and defended by artillery, musketry, 
and cavalry under the command of Murad Bey, one  of the 
chiefs of the Mamelukes.  
A flotilla with supplies had met the French previously, 
so there was no question of lack of ammunition, but the 
enemy, probably numbering 18,000 men, looked as though 
they would make a brave fight of it. They (lid not beli e their 
appearance. The Mamelukes charged the dense squares with 
amazing recklessness but were driven back. Presently 
Napoleon gave the word, his troops surged forward, and 
Frenchman and Arab met in a death -struggle in the trenches. 
Those of the enemy who could make good their escape did so, 
others were mown down as they made the attempt. Some 
expired on the windswept sand, others perished in the turgid 
waters of the Nile. Thus ended the Battle of the Pyramids. At 
nightfall the Egyptian camp presented a ver y different 
spectacle from its appearance in the morning. Soldiers were 
ransacking the scarcely cold bodies of those who had fallen in 
the rout, searching the camp for booty, for jewels, for 
ornaments of silver and of gold. Never was there richer plunder. Napoleon, now master of Cairo, made his 
headquarters in a palace formerly occupied by the defeated 
Murad. As at Malta, Napoleon at once began his scheme of 
reform, only on a necessarily larger scale. A general Congress 
was established for the government of  the country. A scientific 
institute was founded, its chief object being to collect facts and 
figures likely to be of use in the development of Egypt. Many 
of the indispensable accessories of modern civilisation, from 
windmills to printing presses, were in troduced. Romantic 
fancies were becoming realities, when Napoleon heard of the 
irreparable loss of his fleet, news which burst upon him with 
almost stunning force. Think for a moment what the disaster 
meant. The fleet was his sole means of communication wi th 
France. Brueys had signally neglected to carry out his master's 
orders that he was either to enter the harbour of Alexandria or 
to return to Corfu, and he had thereby given Nelson the 
opportunity which he had long been seeking and which had 
eluded him a gain and again. Some excuse is afforded Brueys 
by reason of his bad health, and it is certain that he found it 
next to impossible to control his insubordinate crews. On the 
1st August 1798 the little one -eyed, one -armed British seaman 
not only shattered a French fleet considerably superior in 
strength, but dealt a crushing blow at the supremacy of the 
Republic in Egypt, although the full effects were not to be felt 
at once. The French, who fought with conspicuous bravery, 
were aided by the batteries which t hey had erected on shore, 
whereas the British had only their naval armament to rely 
upon. Within a short time five French ships were put out of 
action; when fighting finished, but two of Napoleon's men -of-
war and two frigates remained to make good their es cape. The 
magnificent Orient   caught fire, and "by the prodigious light of 
this conflagration," Southey tells us in his Life of Nelson , "the 
situation of the two fleets could now be perceived, the colours 
of both being plainly distinguishable. About ten th e ship blew 
up, with a shock that was felt to the very bottom of every 
vessel. Many of the officers and men jumped overboard, some 
clinging to the spars and pieces of wreck with which the sea 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  42 was strewn, others swimming to escape the destruction which 
they momentarily dreaded. Some were picked up by our boats; 
and some, even in the heat and fury of the action, were 
dragged into the lower ports of the nearest British vessel by 
the British sailors. The greater part of the crew, however, 
stood the danger to th e last, and continued to fire from the 
lower deck. This tremendous explosion was followed by a 
silence not less awful. The firing immediately ceased on both 
sides; and the first sound that broke the silence was the dash of 
her shattered masts and yards fal ling into the water from the 
vast height to which they had been exploded. . . . About 
seventy of the Orient's   crew were saved by the English boats. 
Among the many hundreds who perished were the 
Commodore, Casa -Bianca, and his son, a brave boy, only ten 
years old. They were seen floating on a shattered mast when 
the ship blew up."  
Brueys paid for his carelessness with his life, and his 
victorious antagonist was severely wounded. The French 
admiral fought with superb daring, and his dying words: 
"Fight to t he last!" muttered on the quarter -deck as he bore the 
most excruciating agony, are a fitting parallel to those of 
Nelson when he was struck down. "I will take my turn with 
my brave fellows," he said, as the surgeons came to attend to 
his wounds. They were both worthy sons of their countries, 
and if the gods had denied Brueys the genius they had so 
lavishly bestowed on Nelson, he proved himself to be every 
inch a man.  CHAPTER XI 
FROM CAIRO TO FREJUS  
(1798 -1799)  
Napoleon was not the type of man who meets tr oubles 
half way and quietly accepts what some might consider to be 
the inevitable. He certainly believed, or pretended to believe, 
in his star, which was only another word for Fate, with a 
persistency worthy of an astrologer. At the beginning of his 
career  this did not preclude him from taking the utmost 
precautions that his destiny should not be averted by any want 
of energy or forethought on his part. Such a policy is by no 
means the paradox it would appear. A soldier must pull the 
sword from its scabbard  if it is to be of service; faith must be 
supported by works. Therefore, while the General recognised 
the seriousness of his position in Egypt, he was no less 
determined to fight to the end.  
As Murad Bey was still at large, Desaix was sent with 
a detachme nt to Upper Egypt, where he was known to be, 
Napoleon setting off for Suez for the purpose of seeing at first 
hand whether the cutting of a canal was a practicable 
proposition. While he was engaged in this peaceful 
occupation, Europe, encouraged by Nelson' s victory, was 
preparing to resist him in the field. England, Russia and 
Turkey were determined to overthrow French influence in 
Egypt. At Rhodes 20,000 Turks were ready to sail for the seat 
of war, in Syria a second army assembled to assist the other, 
while a third army was preparing in India to land on the shores 
of the Red Sea and attack the French in their rear. There 
seemed, indeed, a possibility that Napoleon might be caught 
between the upper and the nether millstones.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  43 With the craft of the Oriental,  Murad Bey, defeated but 
not crushed, still plotted and planned to rid Egypt of her 
conquerors. At his instigation Cairo revolted, but was taught a 
severe lesson by Napoleon; other conspiracies were dealt with 
in the same stern way. Presently came the star tling news that 
the vanguard of the Syrian army was not only in the field, but 
had actually taken El Arish. With one of those swift 
movements inseparably associated with his science of war, 
Napoleon started with 10,000 troops on a five -days' march 
across t he treacherous desert, the sun blazing down upon the 
men, scorching their faces, baking their feet, and parching 
their tongues. At last the dreary march came to an end, and at 
midnight the French bombarded El Arish and captured the 
town. But there was to b e no rest for the tired troops; they 
resumed their march to Gaza, where another division of the 
Turkish army was routed. On the 4th March 1799, Jaffa was 
reached. It was more a massacre than a battle which ensued, 
and the Turks were compelled to retreat in  disorder before the 
iron hail which decimated their ranks.  
After this battle Napoleon ordered many prisoners to 
be shot. Warfare never has been child's play, and it must be 
remembered that Napoleon could ill afford to have his army 
hindered by the care o f captives. At the same time it is difficult 
to extenuate the act, although some of the victims had been 
captured before and broken their promise not to fight again.  
To reduce Acre, where a strong army was gathered, 
was the next item on the French militar y programme. The 
Turks were fortunate in having the assistance of so able an 
officer as Commodore Sir Sidney Smith, who commanded a 
small fleet with which he captured a French flotilla conveying 
a large number of guns and a considerable quantity of 
ammunit ion for Napoleon from Damietta. The task of reducing 
Acre soon began to look as difficult as that of Mantua in the 
last campaign. The French General had also to fight an unseen 
enemy in the plague which broke out in the army and caused 
serious mortality. T o crown all, news was received of the approach of some 30,000 Turks and Mamelukes. Kleber, with 
an advance guard of 3,000 troops, was pushed forward in the 
direction of the enemy, followed by Napoleon with an equal 
number. Two thousand men were left at Acr e to maintain the 
siege as best they could. "The fate of the East depends upon 
the capture of Acre," he told Bourrienne. "That is the key of 
Constantinople or of India." He counted on being able to raise 
and arm the whole population of Syria on the fall of  the town. 
"My armed masses will penetrate to Constantinople, and the 
Mussulman dominion will be overturned. I shall found in the 
East a new and mighty Empire, which will fix my position 
with posterity." Vain and empty dream, but perhaps not so 
vain or so empty as a casual reader might suppose.  
On the 16th April, Kleber came up with the enemy 
near Mount Tabor, and notwithstanding the disparity in 
numbers, held out for hours against the Turkish host. 
Napoleon and his troops arrived on the scene not a minute  too 
soon; another half an hour in all probability would have 
decided the issue in favour of the Turks. The new detachments 
helped to stem the tide, but the Mussulmans continued their 
valiant attacks upon the French squares. The sterling courage 
of Murat w as never seen to greater advantage. Apparently 
throwing prudence to the winds he charged with his troops 
into the enemy's ranks regardless of consequences. It may 
have been foolhardy, it was certainly dramatic, and turned the 
scales in favour of the French . The issue of the battle of Mount 
Tabor was an annihilation rather than a victory.  
By the 19th Napoleon had returned to his work at Acre. 
Three French frigates brought him six cannon of large caliber 
and intelligence of a rapidly -approaching Turkish flee t, two 
vessels of which they had been fortunate enough to capture.  
Almost every conceivable method of concluding the 
siege was now tried by both parties, and the place was literally 
honeycombed with mines. When the vanguard of the Turkish 
fleet was sighte d, Napoleon knew that if he were to triumph it 
was to be now or never. With additional forces, both naval and 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  44 military, the enemy would outnumber him in an alarming 
proportion, while his own ranks were diminishing hourly. 
Three columns were hurled to the a ttack; one was driven back, 
the others seized a tower which occupied an important 
strategic position. On the following day it became evident that 
without assistance the defenders would be forced to surrender. 
Sir Sidney Smith landed parties of sailors and marines, and 
was afterwards joined by reinforcements from the Turkish 
ships. By a subtle stratagem the French were prompted to 
make a false move which led them into the palace garden, 
where they were literally mown down. For ten days afterwards 
Napoleon st ruggled against the inevitable, and then, during the 
night of the 20th May, he began his first retreat to Cairo, via 
Jaffa and El Arish, a distance of some 300 miles, harassed by 
many a sharp skirmish with the enemy on the way.  
After defeating Murad Bey a nd restoring some sort of 
order in Upper Egypt, Napoleon found it necessary to order 
Desaix to evacuate the province, an immediate concentration 
of troops having become imperative owing to the approach of 
yet another Turkish fleet at Alexandria and the lan ding of 
10,000 Turks at Aboukir. Two battles were fought at 
Alexandria within a few hours, and many of the enemy were 
literally driven into the sea, but it was a close shave and 
Napoleon was within an ace of losing the second battle. Of the 
10,000 Mussulma ns who had landed to annihilate the French 
and restore Turkish rule in Egypt, 2,000 prisoners alone 
remained to tell the tale. It was one of the most marvellous of 
Napoleon's many extraordinary achievements in that country.  
When arranging for an exchange of prisoners Sir 
Sidney Smith took the opportunity to send a little packet of 
newspapers containing news of vital importance to the French 
commander. He read of French reverses, of the great armies of 
the Second Coalition coming into being against the Repu blic, 
of despair and discontent in official and public circles. Indeed, 
the Directory had gone so far as to negotiate for Napoleon's 
return, so inextricable was the muddle they were in, but the General did not hear of this until later. He determined upon a  
policy which has been discussed in and out of season by 
historians for over a century; he would go back to France. 
Modern philosophers would have us believe that his decision 
was "perfectly justifiable on political grounds," but many 
Frenchmen at the time  thought otherwise. To them it seemed a 
flagrant injustice to the army he commanded. "Bonaparte had 
fled from Egypt, as he fled from Russia and from Waterloo," 
says Baron de Frenilly. "A general does not flee —he retreats. 
But Bonaparte was ever the general  of Fortune, and every time 
that she abandoned him he fled like a soldier, leaving the 
others to get out of the difficulty as best they could. This man, 
then, crept out of Egypt by night, glided between the English 
frigates and entered Paris. There he had to stoop and take what 
he wanted. France —after passing, during eight years, from the 
anarchy of revolutionaries to the anarchy of political 
comedians —was eager for the despotism of a single man."  
There is much truth in the Baron's irony. For Napoleon 
the Orient had lost much of its charms; his political horizon 
was bounded again by the west solely because he had an eye 
for the main chance. His thoughts frequently wandered to the 
east at later periods of his career, the appeal becoming at times 
almost irres istible, so completely had the spell enchanted him. 
For the time being, however, it had lost its hold.  
On the night of the 22nd August 1799, Napoleon left 
the inhospitable land of the Pharaohs never to return. There 
were grumbles and desertions on the par t of the troops, which 
vague promises of relief from France did little to compensate. 
Kleber remained in command. On board the two frigates, 
alone available for Napoleon's use, he found accommodation 
for many of the best officers, including Lannes, Berthie r, 
Murat, Marmont, and Duroc, useful men to have at any time. 
Few ships have ever had a more distinguished passenger list. 
God may be on the side of the biggest battalions, as Napoleon 
said, but assuredly Providence was with the little band which 
set out o n so hazardous a voyage on that still summer night. 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  45 The undertaking was fraught with perils, for many British 
ships were sighted, but having once more gazed on his beloved 
Ajaccio, where he was greeted with every sign of respect and 
admiration, Napoleon la nded safely at St Raphael, near Frejus, 
on the 9th October 1799, after an absence from France of 
nearly fifteen months. He had not accomplished all he had set 
out to do, but he had added considerably to his military 
prestige, and that was everything in the  position in which la 
belle France was now placed.  CHAPTER XII 
HOW NAPOLEON SEIZED THE REINS OF 
GOVERNMENT  
(1799)  
We were plunging under full sail back to the abyss of 
the Terror, without a gleam of consolation or of hope. The 
glory of our arms was tarni shed, our conquests lost, our 
territory threatened with invasion. . . . All the efforts made by 
honest statesmen to secure the legal enjoyment of their rights 
had been crushed by violence. There seemed to be nothing 
before us but to return to a bloodthirst y anarchy, the duration 
of which it was as impossible to foresee as it was to find any 
remedy."  
Thus writes the Duke de Broglie of this period, and his 
picture is none too black for reality. The attempt to establish a 
Constitutional Republic had failed; t he Directors had proved 
their inability to hold the reins of government or to check the 
disaster which almost everyone felt must inevitably come. One 
gleam of sunshine alone brightened the horizon of the 
bankrupt nation, namely the news of Napoleon's landi ng. From 
the point of view of the general public this was worth more 
than Massena's victory at Zurich over the Austrians and 
Russians in the previous month, which had alone saved the 
unhappy country from invasion.  
Clearly the Republic needed a strong man at the head 
of affairs; and in Napoleon it soon recognised its master. He 
arrived in Paris on the 16th October 1799, and as on the 
occasion of his return from Italy he was feasted and feted. 
Again he showed the same taciturnity and seeming absence of 
interest. Perhaps to unbend would have been to unmask 
himself; a haughty demeanour often hides a fluttering heart. 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  46 He lived quietly, affecting the unobtrusive dress of the 
National Institute, seeming to take more delight in the 
company of philosophers than of p oliticians. In reality he was 
waiting the turn of events, weighing his chances of securing 
the reins of government, and carefully considering the possible 
policies of Moreau and Bernadotte, the rival generals who 
shared public sympathy with him. Either of the two great 
parties in the government, the Moderates and the Democrats, 
the former under the leadership of Director Sieyes, the latter 
under Director Barras, would have been glad for Napoleon to 
throw in his lot with them; indeed, so keen was popular 
enthusiasm that his glory, reflected in his brother Lucien, 
carried the election of the latter as President of the Five 
Hundred. Without undue haste Napoleon decided in favour of 
the less aggressive and semi -monarchical policy represented 
by Sieyes and suppor ted by the majority of Ancients. Between 
them they determined to overthrow the Directory, their 
immediate accomplices being Lucien Bonaparte, Talleyrand, 
and Roederer. Later the conspirators received the support of 
many of the leading generals, including L annes, Lefebvre, 
Murat, Berthier and Marmont, as well as of many influential 
legislators.  
Meantime accomplices in the Council of Ancients had 
been skilfully at work, and had induced their colleagues to 
decide to transfer the meetings of the two legislativ e bodies 
from the too -accessible Tuileries to the less -frequented St 
Cloud, ostensibly because of a Jacobin conspiracy, in reality 
that the Parisian mob might not interfere, for it was hoped that 
the coming coup d'etat , or "stroke of state," might fall wit h as 
little disturbance as possible. Regnier de la Meurthe, who was 
in the General's confidence, proposed that Napoleon be called 
upon to see that the decrees of removal were executed, which 
was duly carried, a large number of troops thus being placed 
unde r his command for that purpose, which was exactly what 
he required for the complete success of the plot. Proceeding to 
the Tuileries on the 18th Brumaire (November 9), Napoleon 
addressed the assembled Ancients in a short flattering speech, assuring them th at they were the collected wisdom of the 
nation, and offering the support of his generals and of himself. 
When the Council of Five Hundred heard the decree which 
removed them to St Cloud, there were wild scenes which they 
soon found could serve no useful p urpose. Military under the 
command of Lannes, Murat, Mureau, Serrurier, and others had 
been so disposed as to be ready for any emergency either 
within or without the building, and no amount of argument 
could have swayed Napoleon from his purpose. If the 
Directors were not actually deposed they were practically 
forced to resign; Gohier and Moulins, offering opposition, 
were put under arrest.  
 
 
 
INSTALLATION  OF NAPOL EON AS FIRST CONSUL .  
On the following day Napoleon appeared before the 
Ancients at St Cloud and made a short speech, then proceeded 
to an apartment known as the Orangery in which the Five 
Hundred were sitting. The building itself was surrounded by 
troops , and accompanied by a guard he made his entrance, the 
soldiers remaining within call in case their presence should be 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  47 required. Immediately cries of "Down with the tyrant! No 
Cromwell! Down with the Dictator! Outlaw him!" arose from 
different parts of the  hall. Attempts were made to lay violent 
hands on the General, who was bodily removed in a half -
fainting condition by a couple of grenadiers acting under the 
orders of his supporter Lefebvre. Lucien Bonaparte 
endeavoured to make himself heard, but without effect; the 
utmost disorder reigned.  
General Augereau attempted to put the question of 
outlawry to the vote, whereupon the former renounced his 
office of President, flung off his official robes, left the 
building, and joined his brother. He made a rousing  speech to 
the troops, declaring that the majority of the Council of the 
Five Hundred "is enthralled by a faction armed with daggers 
who besiege the tribune and interdict all freedom of 
deliberation. General, and you soldiers, and you citizens, you 
can no longer recognise any as legislators but those who are 
around me. Let force expel those who remained in the 
Orangery; they are not the representatives of the people, but 
the representatives of the dagger," and so on.  
"Soldiers," cried Napoleon, "can I rely  on you?"  
There seemed some hesitation, and Lucien swore to 
plunge his sword in his brother's breast should he make an 
attempt on the liberty of France. This aroused the troops from 
their apathy, and they at once threw in their lot with Napoleon. 
Bayonets  were fixed and the order given to march into the 
Orangery. Not a few of the politicians jumped from the 
windows in their alarm. The Ancients were then informed by 
Lucien that daggers had been used by their fellow 
politicians —probably a figment of his imag ination—and the 
Council of the Five Hundred dissolved. Within an hour of 
midnight a little group of legislators who sided with Napoleon 
passed a decree which abolished the Directory, adjourned 
meetings of the Councils for three months, and created 
Napoleon , Sieyes and Ducos provisional Consuls.  "The 18 Brumaire," to again quote the Duke de 
Broglie, "was the salvation of France, and the four years that 
followed it were a series of triumphs, alike over our external 
enemies, and over the principles of disaste r and anarchy at 
home. These four years are, with the ten years of the reign of 
Henry IV., the noblest period of French history."  
"The little Corporal "had won the day. Henceforth until 
his fall he was to dominate France.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  48 CHAPTER XIII  
THE PASSAGE OF THE  ALPS 
(1799 -1801)  
It must be conceded that Napoleon signalised this 
phase of his career by measures which promised exceedingly 
well for the future. He showed the velvet glove, but it was 
obvious that he, and he alone, was the controlling power in 
France. T he Republic was in chaotic disorder; his first task 
was to unravel the tangled skein. Under the careful nursing of 
Gaudin, subsequently Duke of Gaeta, aided by the energy of 
Napoleon, some kind of business stability was ensured. The 
claims of religion were  recognised and re -established; the 
horrible law of hostages, which visited the presumed sins of 
the fathers upon the heads of their children, and made the 
latter responsible for the actions of the former, was revoked; 
such eminent exiles as Lafayette and Latour -Maubourg were 
allowed to return. Civil war was almost, if not entirely, 
stamped out by the introduction of strong measures, and 
several of the more untractable leaders were shot.  
Under Berthier, who became Minister of War, the 
army was speedily rej uvenated. Sieyes produced a new 
constitution, a not too practicable one be it said. It was 
obviously designed to limit the power of Napoleon as much as 
possible, the actual reins of government being in the hands of 
his two colleagues. Sieyes reckoned witho ut his host, who was 
not prepared to play second fiddle to anyone, and Napoleon 
soon had everything in his grip. Eventually the Government, 
according to the Constitution of the year VIII. of the 
Republican Calendar, was established as follows: After the 
Consuls and Ministers came the Council of State, consisting of 
not more than forty Members, all of whom were appointed by 
the First Consul. They were divided into five sections —Legislation, the Interior, War, Marine and Colonies, Finance. 
The Consuls or thei r seven Ministers of State placed all 
proposed Bills before the section to which they belonged, who 
reported upon them to the Council as a whole. If they were 
deemed worthy they were passed on to the Tribunat, who 
debated on them, and the Corps Legislatif,  who adopted or 
rejected them, the Council carrying out those which were 
accepted. Then there was the Conservative Senate, the 
members of which held office for life. They discussed and 
decided whether acts or laws submitted to them by the 
Government or the  Tribunat were constitutional or otherwise. 
A list of National Notability was to be formed from which the 
Conservative Senate was to select the Consuls, members of the 
Tribunat and Corps Legislatif, and various other officials.  
The Sovereignty of the Peop le was doomed; their 
power was strictly limited. As to Napoleon's own aim at the 
time perhaps Sir Walter Scott is not far wrong when he 
suggests that "his motives were a mixture of patriotism and the 
desire of self -advancement."  
Before long Sieyes and Duc os resigned. Their places 
were filled by Cambaceres, a lawyer who had been a member 
of the Convention, and Lebrun, who had royalist sympathies —
men eminently fitted for the positions of Second and Third 
Consuls respectively. Neither was too clever nor too d ull to 
exercise the strictly limited power they enjoyed, both were 
moderate in their views, and possessed a fair stock of common 
sense. Of other persons whom Napoleon attached to himself 
and his now rapidly -increasing prospects we need only 
mention Talleyr and, who combined the wisdom of the serpent 
with its cunning, and who was reinstated Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, and Fouche, of even more easy conscience, who 
became Minister of Police, a department with which he 
likewise had made acquaintance previously.   
Napoleon, now officially styled First Consul and 
having a salary of half a million francs a year, speedily 
removed to the magnificent palace of the Tuileries, where he 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  49 had a Court worthy of a reigning monarch. The levelling 
process of the Revolution gave  place to the observance of 
formal rules and the stateliest ceremonies. Napoleon was 
monarch in all but name, which was to come.  
So much for home affairs; the outlook abroad was not 
so bright. A second coalition had been formed by Russia 
Austria, England,  Turkey, Naples, and Portugal against France 
during Napoleon's absence in Egypt, and the Republic was still 
at war with Great Britain and Austria. In order to make it 
appear that he was sincere in his expressions of a desire for 
peace, Napoleon wrote perso nal letters to the heads of the 
belligerent States. It is extremely unlikely that he meant what 
he said. Neither the means by which he had obtained power 
nor his previous career were calculated to give confidence in 
his sincerity. Nothing practical came of  the overtures. Austria 
and Russia had defeated such tried generals as Scherer, 
Moreau, Macdonald, and Joubert, and as "nothing succeeds 
like success," the Emperor Francis was unusually optimistic. 
In Northern Italy, Genoa alone remained to the French, and  
although the Republicans had gained splendid victories in 
Holland and Switzerland, Austria was determined to bring the 
war to the very doors of the French. In order to make the 
succeeding operations clear the movements of the various 
armies will be detail ed separately.  
The French army of Italy, on the Riviera and at Genoa, 
which was in a most distressing condition, was under 
Massena, their opponents being commanded by Melas, whose 
actual fighting strength was more than double that of the 
Republicans. The Imperialists succeeded in dividing the 
French army, whereby Suchet was cut off from the main force, 
but he defended himself with conspicuous energy. Massena 
retreated to Genoa, the British under Lord Keith preventing 
exit and ingress at sea, the Austrians besieging the city. The 
French general held out until the 4th June, when he was 
allowed to evacuate the place by the Allies.  
 
 
THE PASSAGE  OF THE ST. BERNARD .  
The Republican army of the Rhine, commanded by 
Moreau, was distributed between Strassburg and Constance, 
and was also in smaller numerical strength than the Austrian 
forces under Dray, whose total forces reached 150,000, or 
some 40,000 more than the French. The Imperialists had also 
the additional advantage of occupying a magnificent strategic 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  50 position at Donaueschingen. Moreau crossed the Rhine, fought 
several victorious battles, and prevented the enemy from 
keeping in touch with Melas. Napoleon had wished h im to 
strike a decisive blow at Donaueschingen, but the more 
cautious Moreau, lacking the military genius of the First 
Consul, regarded so drastic an operation as extremely 
hazardous and exposing his force to annihilation. He was 
successful, however, in en ticing the Austrian general from his 
commanding position, and Kray's subsequent movements were 
so disastrous that he was forced to take shelter in Ulm, a town 
so strongly fortified as to be almost impregnable.  
There was much hard fighting before the city 
capitulated. Subsequently Munich was entered, and it seemed 
as though nothing could stop Moreau's progress save only his 
want of faith in himself, for even a brave soldier does not 
always realise his own strength. The Armistice of Parsdorf, 
signed on the 1 5th July 1800, suspended hostilities in 
Germany for a short period.  
Meantime Napoleon, with a reserve army numbering 
from 40,000 to 50,000 troops, decided to cross the Alps and so 
manoeuvre that the "white coats" would be placed between 
Massena's forces a nd his own. In addition he was determined 
that Austria should surrender what he doubtless considered her 
ill-gotten gains, namely those parts of Italy which the French 
had lost. It was a bold plan, for the ranges were in very truth 
"mountains of difficult. " The greatest secrecy was observed, a 
corps being assembled at Dijon to deceive the enemy, the 
troops intended for the expedition being quietly concentrated 
at Geneva and Lausanne. It was a deep -laid plot and worked 
wonderfully well. While Austria was pok ing fun in caricature 
and print at the nondescript troops which were to be seen 
lounging about or parading in the streets of the old 'capital of 
Burgundy, Napoleon and Berthier, the latter of whom had 
been appointed Commander -in-Chief, were working all day  
and oftentimes far into the night perfecting arrangements for 
the great surprise. The means of transport for the heavy artillery alone presented considerable difficulty, and this was 
but one of many difficulties unknown in previous campaigns. 
It was final ly decided that the cannon should be placed in 
hollowed -out tree -trunks sawn in half after the manner of 
primitive boats. When on the march these were to be hauled 
by gangs of peasants or soldiers, for it was soon found that 
sufficient mules were not procu rable.  
In May 1800, Napoleon was at Geneva. After 
consultations with the engineers it was determined that the 
main army should cross into Lombardy by the Great St 
Bernard, smaller divisions travelling by the St Gothard, Mount 
Cenis, and Little St Bernard routes, the better to mislead the 
enemy. A start was made on the 15th. Column after column 
began the weary tramp along the desolate, snow -covered 
tracks, feeling their way across narrow ledges over precipices, 
cheered again and again by a sight of the Firs t Consul as, 
wrapped in a grey overcoat and seated on a mule led by a 
guide, he traversed the rugged route of the Great St Bernard. 
The twenty miles of soldiers crossed in less than a week, and 
considering the treacherous nature of the march, or rather 
scramble, very few lost their lives.  
The post of Bard, on the banks of the Aosta in the 
valley of that name, garrisoned by the Austrians, had been 
attacked by the advance guard under Lannes without success. 
It was the most serious opposition they had yet enc ountered, 
and it was necessary to pass almost under the shadow of the 
guns. Marmont conceived a happy device which proved 
entirely successful. At night the streets through the village 
were liberally strewn with straw and other stubble by the 
French soldier s. The wheels of the gun -carriages were then 
carefully covered to avoid rattling, and the passage was 
successfully achieved, although the alarm was sounded and 
there was some desultory firing.  
On the 2nd June Napoleon, marching with the utmost 
rapidity, e ntered Milan. A week later, and almost at the same 
time as the First Consul was withdrawing his troops from the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  51 old city for further offensive operations, Lannes with the 
advance guard won the important victory of Montebello. The 
nature of the battle was s uch that the French general said he 
could hear the bones crash in his division like hail falling on a 
skylight. Cremona, Piacenza, and other places fell, but on the 
14th, at a specially inopportune time, because Napoleon had 
thought it necessary to divide his forces owing to his 
uncertainty as to the precise whereabouts of the enemy, 
11Zelas and 31,000 Austrians appeared in the plain of the 
Bormida. The skill of Lannes and Victor proved of no avail; 
the reinforcements which the First Consul brought up could  
not shake the determination of the Imperialists. The wounded 
Austrian commander, foreseeing no further engagement and 
complimenting himself on his success, left the field. In this he 
committed an irretrievable blunder. Desaix, but recently 
returned from E gypt, was in command of 6000 men some 
miles away, and having heard the dull roar of cannon, was 
hurrying to Napoleon's assistance. He arrived late in the 
afternoon, and is said to have assured the First Consul that "the 
battle is lost, but there is time to  gain another."  
There must be no retreat on the part of the French. This 
was the decision arrived at after a short council of war. New 
dispositions were made; Desaix was to stop the Austrian 
columns, the main forces were to fall upon the enemy's flank. 
Thiers tells us what happened during the second battle of 
Marengo.  
"General Marmont suddenly unmasked a battery of 
twelve pieces of cannon; a thick shower of grape -shot fell 
upon the head of the surprised Austrian column, not expecting 
any fresh resistance,  for they fully believed the French were 
decidedly retreating. It had scarcely recovered from this 
sudden shock, when Desaix drove down the Ninth Light 
Infantry. 'Go tell the First Consul,' said he to his aide -de-camp 
Savary, 'that I am charging, and want some cavalry to support 
me.' Desaix, on horseback, led this half -brigade. At its head he 
ascended the gentle elevation which concealed him from the Austrians, and abruptly disclosed himself to them by a volley 
of musketry from his leading column, at point blank distance. 
The Austrians replied to this, and Desaix fell, struck by a 
bullet in the chest. 'Conceal my death,' said he to General 
Boudet, who was his chief of division; 'it may dispirit the 
troops.'  
 
 
 
THE DEATH  OF GENERAL  DESAIX .  
"Useless precaution of this hero! They saw him fall, 
and his soldiers, like those of Turenne, with a terrific shout, 
insisted on avenging their leader. The Ninth Light Infantry —
which on that day earned the title of 'Incomparable,' a name 
which it bore to the termination of our war —having poured 
forth their fire, formed in column, and fell upon the dense 
mass of the Austrians. At the sight of it, these two first 
regiments which head ed the line of march, taken by surprise, 
fell back in disorder upon the second line, and disappeared in 
its ranks. The column of grenadiers of Latterman then found 
itself alone at the head, and stood this charge like troops 
inured to fight. It stood firm. The conflict extended on both 
sides of the road; the Ninth was supported on the right by 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  52 Victor's rallied troops, on the left by the Thirtieth and Fifty -
ninth half -brigades of the division of Boudet, which had 
followed the movement. The grenadiers of Latte rman were 
with difficulty defending themselves, when suddenly an 
unlooked -for storm now burst upon them. General Kellerman, 
who, on the application of Desaix, had received the order to 
charge, galloped forward, and passing Lannes and Desaix, 
posted part of  his squadrons, to make head against the 
Austrian cavalry which he saw before him, then with the 
remainder charged the flank of the column of grenadiers, 
already attacked in front by the infantry of Boudet. This 
charge, executed in brilliant style, divided  the column in two. 
The dragoons of Kellerman sabred the Austrians right and left, 
until, pressed on all sides, the unfortunate grenadiers laid 
down their arms. Two thousand surrendered prisoners of war. 
At their head, General Zach himself was obliged to s urrender."  
The fight continued, Kellerman charged again and 
again, while Lannes and Saint Cyr showed that they had lost 
none of their prowess. The Austrian cavalry was driven back 
by Bessieres and Eugene Beauharnais. "The confusion at the 
bridges of the B ormida," adds Thiers, "became every moment 
still more irremediable. Infantry, cavalry, and artillery 
crowded together in disorder, the bridges could not afford a 
passage for the entire army, then en masse; multitudes threw 
themselves into the Bormida for t he purpose of fording it. An 
artilleryman attempted to cross it with his gun, and succeeded. 
The entire artillery then followed his example, but without 
success, as several of the carriages stuck fast in the bed of the 
river. The French, now hotly pursuing , took men, horses, guns, 
and baggage. The unfortunate Baron Melas, who, but two 
hours before, had left his army in possession of victory, 
galloped up on report of this disaster, and could scarcely credit 
what he saw; he gave himself up to despair."  
"Tell  the First Consul," gasped the dying Desaix, "that 
my only regret in dying is to have perished before having done 
enough to live in the recollection of posterity." His fame, however, will always be recorded in connection with the battle 
of Marengo. "A glor ious day's work," said Napoleon. "If only I 
could have embraced Desaix upon the battlefield! I should 
have made him Minister of War, and a prince, too, had it been 
in my power." During his weary exile Napoleon also spoke 
lovingly of the fallen general, as he did of Kleber, who 
perished on the same day in Egypt, the victim of an assassin's 
dagger.  
"Of all the generals I ever had under my command," 
said the fallen Emperor, "Desaix and Kleber possessed the 
greatest talent —Desaix pre -eminently, as Kleber loved  glory 
only as the means of acquiring wealth and pleasure. Desaix 
loved glory for itself, and despised every other consideration. 
To him riches and pleasure were of no value, nor did he ever 
give them a moment's thought. He was a little, black -looking 
man,  about an inch shorter than myself, always badly dressed, 
sometimes even ragged, and despising alike comfort and 
convenience. Enveloped in a cloak, Desaix would throw 
himself under a gun and sleep as contentedly as if reposing in 
a palace. Luxury had for h im no charms. Frank and honest in 
all his proceedings, he was called by the Arabs, 'Sultan the 
Just.' Nature intended him to figure as a consummate general. 
Kleber and Desaix were irreparable losses to France."  
Melas, broken in spirit and wounded, request ed an 
armistice. After considerable dallying on the part of the Court 
of Vienna and ruthless determination to have his own way on 
that of Napoleon, hostilities were resumed in November, 1800.  
The First Consul had now returned to Paris, and the 
interest of  the campaign centres around the armies led by 
Moreau and Brune, who had succeeded Massena. It will be 
remembered that the former had agreed to a truce in the 
previous July, and when the sword was again unsheathed 
owing to the causes briefly mentioned in t he previous 
paragraph his opponent was no longer Kray, but the Archduke 
John, a brother of the Emperor. At first the Archduke enjoyed 
a temporary triumph, but Moreau wreaked a terrible 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  53 vengeance at the battle of Hohenlinden, fought on the 2nd 
December. No fewer than 20,000 Austrians were captured or 
left dead or wounded on the snow -clad plain and in the 
undergrowth of the forest.  
The poet Campbell has painted a vivid picture of the 
tragic scene:  
On Linden, when the sun was low,  
All bloodless lay th' untr odden snow;  
And dark as winter was the flow  
Of Iser, rolling rapidly.  
 
But Linden saw another sight,  
When the drum beat, at dead of night,  
Commanding fires of death to light  
The darkness of her scenery.  
 
By torch and trumpet fast arrayed,  
Each warrior drew his battle -blade,  
And furious every charger neighed,  
To join the dreadful revelry.  
 
Then shook the hills with thunder riven;  
Then rushed the steed to battle driven,  
And louder than the bolts of Heaven,  
Far flashed the red artillery.  
 
But redder yet  that light shall glow  
On Linden's hills of stained snow;  
And bloodier yet the torrent flow  
Of Iser, rolling rapidly.  
 
'Tis morn, but scarce yon level sun  
Can pierce the war -clouds, rolling dun,  
Where furious Frank, and fiery Hun,  
Shout in their sulph' rous canopy.  
 
The combat deepens. On, ye brave  Who rush to glory, or the gravo!  
Wave, Munich! all thy banners wave!  
And charge with all thy chivalry!  
 
Few, few shall part, where many meet!  
The snow shall be their winding -sheet,  
And every turf beneath t heir feet  
Shall be a soldier's sepulchre.  
Moreau gave the enemy no time to recover from the 
disaster, and brought them to action again and again with the 
most favourable results. Indeed, he was within easy distance of 
Vienna itself when he agreed to sign an armistice at Steyer on 
Christmas Day 1800, the terms of which were particularly 
advantageous to his own country.  
Macdonald hastened to the assistance of Brune. He 
crossed the Splugen from Switzerland to Italy in the face of 
colossal difficulties, diffi culties far greater than those when 
Napoleon turned the Alps. The passage was made in winter, 
snow beating in the faces of the soldiers, some of whom were 
whirled to destruction by an avalanche. Eventually the 
junction was effected, Brune having bravely fo rced his way to 
Macdonald by overcoming the opposition of the Imperialists 
whenever he had an opportunity. Finding that he could make 
no progress, Bellegarde, the Austrian commander, proposed a 
truce, and the armistice of Treviso was signed on the 16th 
January 1801.  
Peace, a "peace at any price" let it be said, was secured 
by the signature of the Treaty of Luneville on the 9th February 
1801, by which France added considerably to her greatness 
and Napoleon to his fame, both in the Republic and abroad. 
Forei gn admiration of the First Consul's genius, however, was 
not unmixed with disgust at the exacting nature of his 
demands. Belgium and the  left bank of the Rhine again 
became French territory; the Batavian (Dutch), Helvetic 
(Swiss), Ligurian, and Cisalpine r epublics were recognised, 
and various changes effected in Tuscany and elsewhere. The 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  54 River Adige became Austria's boundary in Italy, and she 
retained Venice.  
Brief mention must be made of an alliance arranged by 
the Czar and the First Consul which almost certainly would 
have had far -reaching results but for the assassination of the 
former and the British naval victory off Copenhagen in which 
Nelson played so conspicuous a part. Alexander I., who 
succeeded his father, refused to play into the hands of 
Napol eon, and friendly relations between his Court and that of 
St James was definitely re -established by the Treaty of St 
Petersburg, the 17th June 1801. The Maritime Confederacy 
was dissolved, the Czar's example being followed by Sweden 
and Denmark.  
The First  Consul felt Paul's death very keenly, but 
more from a political than a friendly point of view. "In concert 
with the Czar," he told Bourrienne, "I was sure of striking a 
mortal blow at the English power in India. A palace revolution 
has overturned all my p rojects." One can imagine how the 
vexation caused by the complete abandonment of such a 
scheme was intensified by the knowledge that Great Britain 
continued to hold command of the sea.  CHAPTER XIV 
BLESSINGS OF PEACE  
(1801 -1803)  
It now became eminently de sirable that Napoleon 
should pay some attention to the domestic affairs of France 
and of the countries dominated by her. He determined to 
infuse a little of his own inexhaustible energy into the 
departments of State, and to restore public confidence 
genera lly. That some kind of mutual understanding should be 
arrived at with the Powers who were not under his thumb was 
a prime necessity. Affairs on the Continent were by no means 
without possibilities of danger to the Republic. Russia and 
Great Britain had bec ome allies, the hitherto neutral scales of 
Prussia might at any moment lean towards the latter, and 
Austria had not become reconciled to the loss of her territories.  
When England set on foot proposals for a cessation of 
hostilities which had continued sin ce 1793, Napoleon was 
busily preparing a flotilla for the invasion of that island, to 
which project he had devoted considerable thought. Although 
he did not betray his eagerness, he certainly felt that there 
could be no greater or more profitable blessing than a period 
of peace, which would enable him to carry out various reforms 
and also to consolidate his own interests. The negotiations 
finally took definite shape in the short -lived Treaty of Amiens. 
The British Government under the leadership of Addingto n 
lacked the genius and foresight of Pitt, consequently the 
balance of profit from the Treaty was on the side of France. 
The Egyptian question was to be settled by that country being 
restored to the Sultan; Malta was to be handed back to the 
Knights of St John, its former possessors; Great Britain was to 
retain Ceylon and Trinidad alone of her colonial conquests 
during the war. These were the principal items of the Treaty, 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  55 the preliminaries of which were signed in London on the 1st 
October 1801. France was at peace with all the world.  
Napoleon, whose term of office as First Consul had 
been extended for ten years (at a later period he was made 
Consul for life), now directed the whole of his powers on the 
internal government of France. Neither afraid of God n or man 
personally, he early discerned that religion had a deep political 
significance. France had tried to blot out Christianity, but as a 
result of her efforts the old forms of worship had merely given 
place to vague speculations and makeshifts. The Chris tian 
faith was re -established by the Concordat, a "treaty of peace 
with the Roman Catholic Church," as an eminent modern 
scholar terms it, the First Consul setting a good example by 
attending Mass at Notre Dame. This was followed by the 
inauguration of the  Civil Code, a readjustment of laws 
involving the most arduous research on the part of those 
learned in the intricacies of jurisprudence.  
Commerce received a fresh impetus, public works 
were undertaken, and social life revived. So great was the 
confidence  of Englishmen that they again began to make the 
"grand tour" of the Continent, then deemed a necessary part of 
the education of members of the upper classes. The Diary of 
Robert Sym, clerk to his Majesty's Signet, affords us an 
interesting glimpse of Napo leon at this time. He writes in his 
quaint way as follows:  
"On the 'Quinze Thermidor' (Tuesday, August 3rd, 
1802) we saw Bonaparte review in the 'Cour des Tuileries' 
what was certainly the flower of his army, for they were very 
different men from those we  had seen on the road and at 
Calais. We never saw a finer body of men than these, nor finer 
horses and accoutrements, and all clothed and equipped in the 
most complete manner. The corps of Chasseurs and of the 
Gens d'Armerie, in particular, were very fine men. The corps 
of Guides, too, seemed to be all picked. These latter were 
commanded by young Beauharnais, the son of the wife of 
Bonaparte. . . .  "About twelve o'clock Bonaparte came down the great 
stair of the Tuileries and one of our party, who happened  to be 
right opposite the porch, told us that he mounted his horse 
from wooden steps. He then rode forward, accompanied by 
about fifteen or twenty generals and a Mameluke from Egypt. 
All his suite were dressed and powdered in the most showy 
manner, but Bon aparte himself wore a plain green coat with a 
narrow white cloth edging at the seams, such as servants in 
this country sometimes wear, and a cocked hat without any 
lace. His hair is very black and is cropped very close to his 
head and neck, so that his ear s are all bare. It falls down over 
his brow. His complexion is swarthy, his face long, a fine 
nose, his eyes are very dark and his eyebrows fall, or are 
drawn down, much over his eyes. His cheek bones are high, 
and his cheeks sink between the bones of the face and those of 
the chin, which gives him a wasted, consumptive look. His 
upper lip projects in the middle of his mouth, considerably 
over the under one, and his chin is sharp and prominent. He 
does not seem to be above five feet six, and is very thin. H e is 
thirty -three years of age. To me he appeared to have the look 
of anxiety, or rather of terror. He was mounted on a beautiful 
Arabian grey horse, one of the most perfect animals I ever 
saw. His saddle, or rather housing, on which he sat, was purple 
velvet, richly embroidered with gold and a great many nets 
and trappings. . . . Bonaparte was nearly an hour and a half on 
horseback on this occasion. During all that period he never 
once opened his lips, nor did he turn his head to the right or to 
the left. He looked straight over his horse's ears. No person 
spoke to him, nor was he cheered or huzzaed, either when he 
came into the Cour or when he departed."  
The conquests of the Republic in Italy, Holland, 
Belgium, the left bank of the Rhine, and Switzerland imposed 
considerable responsibility upon the French, and it was 
necessary to reorganize the several governments. They were 
encumbered by tradition, with which Napoleon had little or no 
sympathy. As regards the independence which the inhabitants 
had every r eason to expect by the terms of the Peace of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  56 Luneville, the First Consul was rich in promise and poor in 
performance. Moderation was a quality distinctly lacking in 
Napoleonic statesmanship. The very thought of a national 
spirit was a nightmare to the man who was now bent on 
building a vast Empire of the West. Northern Italy was 
completely dominated by him; Piedmont, for long the football 
of Austria and France, was incorporated with the Republic, 
Parma and Placentia were occupied. The Cisalpine Republic 
speedily became the Italian Republic, a high -sounding name 
calculated to please, with Napoleon as President and a French 
army of occupation. Within certain limits the First Consul's 
jurisdiction was, beneficial, even though he ruled on despotic 
principles.  
To Holland, now the Batavian Republic, he granted a 
constitution, but many of his measures were too arbitrary for 
the stolid Dutch; there was no end to their grievances, both 
fancied and real. Probably the provinces on the left bank of the 
Rhine, which were  incorporated with France, gained more 
lasting advantages if only because they were less meddled 
with. Affairs on the opposite side of the river attracted more 
attention; in Germany there was something worth playing for. 
With the Czar's consent, Napoleon s et about rearranging the 
various German States. This he did to his present satisfaction, 
Francis II. of the unwieldy Holy Roman Empire, of which 
these territories formed a part, meekly acquiescing, as befits a 
monarch who has no alternative but to grin and  bear 
unpreventable misfortunes. Over two hundred independent 
States formerly belonging to bishops, abbots, and petty 
sovereigns were eventually annexed to their larger neighbours, 
the idea being to gain the goodwill and friendship of the more 
important ru lers.  
Switzerland, a neutral State according to the Treaty of 
Luneville but not held to be so by the First Consul, was more 
difficult of settlement. After several systems of government 
had been tried and failed, Napoleon himself drew up the 
Constitution o f Malmaison. This he forced the country to accept in May, 1801, but it was amended in the following 
year. On the withdrawal of the French army of occupation, 
civil war broke out among the patriotic Swiss, Ney speedily 
quelling it, however, with a formidabl e body of troops. The 
Helvetian Republic was too important from a military point of 
view to be allowed to snap the fetters which linked it to 
France.  
European affairs, it might be thought, would have been 
sufficiently exhausting to preclude colonial proje cts. But, to 
use an apparent paradox, Napoleon never had more time to 
spare than when he was most busy. He derived his recreation 
from change of work, shutting up one drawer in his mind to 
open another, to use his own simile. Of leisure and ease he had 
little; a visit to the theatre, a hunt occasionally, an hour's chat 
with Josephine and the ladies of the Consular Court, during 
which he would tell them the most creepy ghost stories, and a 
game of cards at which he cheated, sufficed him for pastime. 
He took exercise while working, restlessly pacing the study 
while he dictated a torrent of words on civil, military, and 
naval matters, or walking in the garden discussing affairs with 
a Minister of State.  
At this period Napoleon's intellect and powers of 
exhaust ive concentration were at their best, and it is 
characteristic of his marvellous energy that he could find time 
to devote to the possessions of the Republic overseas. He 
resolved upon an attempt to recover San Domingo, in the West 
Indies, then ruled by the  famous negro President Toussaint 
L'Ouverture, the subject of one of Wordsworth's greatest 
sonnets: "Toussaint, thou most unhappy man of men." France 
had practically lost her supremacy of this important West India 
island owing to a revolt of the negroes, a nd there seemed a 
likelihood of Toussaint declaring its independence.  
The First Consul sent off 21,000 troops under General 
Leclerc, who had married Pauline, the prettiest of the 
Bonaparte sisters, and the blacks were eventually routed. 
Some months later,  when the yellow fever had laid low many 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  57 of the French soldiers and England and the Republic were 
again at war, the cause of the negroes was taken up by the 
British, with the result that the independence of San Domingo 
was definitely established. Only one -fifth of the expeditionary 
army returned to France.  
In a diary kept by Rear -Admiral Sir George Cockburn's 
secretary during Napoleon's voyage in the Northumberland to 
St Helena, a conversation is recorded in which the ex -Emperor 
referred particularly to th e West Indies. He said that "had he 
continued at the head of the French Government, he never 
would have attempted the re -occupation of St Domingo; that 
the most he would have established with regard to that island 
would have been to keep frigates and sloop s stationed around 
it to force the blacks to receive everything they wanted from, 
and to export all their produce exclusively to, France; for, he 
added, he considered the independence of the blacks there to 
be more likely to prove detrimental to England th an to France. 
This latter remark is a reiteration of his feelings with respect to 
England, as in all the calculations he makes, the proportion of 
evil which may accrue to our nation seems to bear in his mind 
the first consideration."  
In the early days of 1803 the First Consul's attention 
was distracted by events nearer home, and he had no 
alternative but to abandon his dreams of a Colonial Empire. If, 
as he afterwards stated, "the Saint Domingo business" was 
"the greatest error in all my government I ever committed," he 
had been able to obtain Louisiana from Spain in exchange for 
an extension of territory in Italy, and also to secure Guiana.  CHAPTER XV 
THE DAWN OF THE EMPIRE  
(1803 -1804)  
While neither party kept strictly to the terms of the 
Peace of Amiens , Napoleon's aggressive policy was such as to 
disturb other Powers as well as Great Britain. There was no 
knowing who might be the object of his unwelcome attentions. 
Frontiers seemed suddenly to have lost their significance and 
usefulness, treaties became  of less value than the parchment 
on which they were written. Great Britain complained that 
whereas the Treaty of Luneville had guaranteed the 
independence of the Batavian Republic, French troops were 
stationed within her borders, as well as in those of 
Switzerland. Napoleon retorted by saying that Great Britain 
still kept Malta. Eventually England declared war on the 18th 
May 1803, and it was to be a duel to the death.  
Napoleon, usually so wide awake, was taken by 
surprise. He did not anticipate so quick a decision on the part 
of Addington's administration. He retaliated in an utterly 
senseless and cruel way by ordering that every British subject 
on French territory should be arrested and imprisoned. Small 
wonder that English newspapers vilified the First Consul as 
the Corsican Ogre, that the pens of Gillray, Cruikshank, 
Woodward, and a host of lesser artists caricatured him almost 
out of recognition; that poets poured forth vituperation in 
minor verse, and that Scott and Wordsworth wrote battle cries. 
Few people in England entertained the sympathy and 
admiration for the ruler of France shown by Dr Parr. "Sir," he 
once remarked, "I should not think I had done my duty if I 
went to bed any night without praying for the success of 
Napoleon Bonaparte."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  58 To strik e a mortal blow at the very heart of the British 
Empire and to ruin her commerce on the Continent now 
became the consuming object of Napoleon's ambition. He 
would cross the Channel, march on London, subjugate the 
United, Kingdom, and while preparations for  this bold move 
ere being made, close the ports of Europe against her. "They 
want to snake us jump the ditch, and we'll jump it," to quote an 
expression he used at an audience of ambassadors on the 1st 
May 1803. Frenchmen joyfully anticipated the triumph o f the 
man with so bold an ambition; Englishmen armed themselves 
as eagerly to defend hearth and home. A Territorial Army of 
which posterity may well be proud quickly came into being. In 
March 1805 no fewer than 810,000 troops —Militia, 
Volunteers, and Fenci bles—were prepared to defy Napoleon. 
The politician and the publican, the ploughboy and the squire, 
joined hands in the mutual cause as though no difference of 
class existed. George III. announced his intention of leading 
the troops in person if necessary.  Pitt was acting -colonel of a 
regiment, and Charles James Fox became a humble private.  
Fortunately Great Britain had a navy, while Napoleon 
had practically to create one. Many of his finest ships were far 
away in the West Indies, and the Dutch fleet was s mall and of 
little consequence. England lost no time in maritime 
preparations: she was ready; Napoleon wished to gain every 
minute he could. While the sound of the shipwright's hammer 
rang through the coasts of France, the white sails of Old 
England kept w atch to prevent all entry or exit from her 
harbours. The most important command, that of the 
Mediterranean, was given to Nelson. Cornwallis was stationed 
off Brest, the great western arsenal of France, while Keith 
patrolled the North Sea and the Straits of  Dover. In addition, 
there were various smaller squadrons cruising about ready for 
instant action.  
Three -deckers were laid down in many of the most 
important French seaports, cities and towns vying with each 
other in offering money to the Government for m en-of-war. Smaller centres contributed in proportion to their means; naval 
stores, artillery, and ammunition were also supplied at the 
public expense. At Boulogne a flotilla of small vessels of 
various kinds was collected, some fitted with artillery, other s 
for the conveyance of horses. Rowing boats were built on the 
river banks for the transportation of the troops. Fishing smacks 
were purchased and converted into miniature warships; the 
doings of smugglers were winked at, provided they brought 
information about the English coast likely to be of use. If ever 
a man was in earnest, Napoleon certainly was during the time 
of the Great Terror. He formed a vast camp at Boulogne, 
detailed battalions of soldiers to construct a mammoth basin to 
hold part of the floti lla, and others to build forts and learn to 
row. He showed himself frequently, inspiring the men by his 
terse phrases of encouragement, and consulting Admiral Bruix 
and others who had charge of the preparations on the most 
insignificant detail. He tested c annon, made short voyages in 
the different types of vessel, and lived for days at a stretch in a 
little chateau at the top of a cliff.  
In the early stages of the war Napoleon had thought it 
would be possible to convey his troops in the small craft 
without  making use of the navy proper. He hoped that on a 
dark or foggy night it might be possible to elude the vigilance 
of the British cruisers and land on the south coast of England 
before the enemy was aware of his intention. Later, he 
recognised that a succe ssful crossing was impossible without 
the protection of the men -of-war, and the necessity for this 
added immensely to his many difficulties.  
Napoleon did not content himself solely with 
preparations for the campaign in England. He sent Mortier to 
overrun Hanover, the hereditary territory of George III., seized 
the important commercial cities of Bremen and Hamburg, and 
closed the rivers Elbe and Weser against British commerce. In 
Italy the ports of Tarentum and Leghorn, with which British 
merchants did a co nsiderable amount of trade, were also 
occupied. Not content with these drastic measures, Napoleon 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  59 decreed that any ship which had so much as called at a British 
port was liable to be captured. With great good fortune the 
majority of the vessels from San Do mingo eventually reached 
home ports, but several put in at the harbours of Coruna and 
Cadiz. Spain, unluckily for herself as it afterwards appeared, 
allowed supplies to be sent to the blockaded ships. Spain, 
indeed, helped France in other ways, including t he payment of 
an annual subsidy. Portugal also agreed to disburse £640,000 a 
year.  
Beloved though he was by the majority of the nation, 
Napoleon had enemies. Several attempts were made to take his 
life. In one of these, he narrowly escaped being blown to 
pieces by an infernal machine in the Rue St Nicaise, the plot 
being promoted by the Royalists of La Vendee. Napoleon 
showed his vindictive nature by seizing the opportunity to 
teach a lesson to the Jacobins, who had no hand whatever in 
the affair, and a hu ndred and thirty innocent persons were 
sentenced to transportation for life. Another Royalist 
conspiracy was that of Georges Cadoudal and Pichegru. These 
men tried to implicate Moreau, but without success. The 
famous Republican general, however, was arrest ed, with the 
ringleaders; Pichegru was found strangled in prison, Georges 
Cadoudal was guillotined, and Moreau was banished to 
America. The last was entirely innocent, but he had the 
misfortune to be Napoleon's rival, and that was sufficient 
condemnation. He had won his spurs in the early days of the 
Revolution by placing himself at the head of a battalion of 
Breton volunteers, and he was popular with the army. An 
instance of his sterling integrity, one of many which redound 
to his credit, may be given. Whe n the landed property of the 
aristocracy was sold as belonging to the nation, an estate 
owned by M. d'Orsay, adjoining that of Moreau, was sold to 
the Republican general at an absurdly low figure. Not only did 
the new owner inform his former neighbour of t he transaction, 
but he insisted on paying him what he considered was a 
legitimate price.  
 
 
THE CORONATION  IN NOTRE  DAME .  
The Duc d'Enghien, son of the Duc de Bou rbon, was 
even more unfortunate than Moreau. He also was charged with 
complicity in the Royalist plot, and although no evidence was 
produced against him, he was shot and buried in a grave dug 
before his trial, by a so -called special military commission, in  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  60 the fortress of Vincennes. The story of the way in which the 
young duke's father heard the news is pathetic. He was an 
exile in London, living at the time in a small suite of rooms 
with one valet. As breakfast did not appear at the prescribed 
hour one mor ning, and no notice being taken of his repeated 
ringing of the bell, he entered the kitchen and found his 
servant bowed down with sorrow. On the table was a 
newspaper containing particulars of the grim tragedy. For two 
hours the sorely stricken parent was overcome by agonising 
grief in the humble little room. The Comtesse de Boigne, one 
of the many French emigrants who sought a refuge in England, 
relates the above, in her entertaining Memoirs , adding that this 
excessive grief was "accompanied by fits of rag e and cries for 
vengeance."  
"This was the only means I had of leaving no doubt as 
to my intentions, and of annihilating the hopes of the partisans 
of the Bourbons," Napoleon wrote callously to his brother 
Joseph. "If what I have done were still to be done ," he 
continues, "I would do it again, and if I had a favourable 
opportunity I would get rid of the rest." Fouche's caustic 
comment, "it was worse than a crime, it was a blunder," has 
passed into a proverb.  
The conspiracy of Cadoudal and Pichegru was made  a 
pretext on the part of the Senate for sending a deputation to the 
First Consul, who was told that, as he was founding a new era, 
he ought to perpetuate it. "We do not doubt but this great idea 
has had a share of your attention," said the President durin g 
the course of his short and flattering address, "for your creative 
genius embraces all and forgets nothing. But do not delay: you 
are urged on by the times, by events, by conspirators, and by 
ambitious men; and in another direction, by the anxiety which 
agitates the French people. It is in your power to enchain time, 
master events, disdain the ambitious, and tranquillize the 
whole of France by giving it institutions which will cement 
your edifice, and prolong for our children what you have done for their fathers. Citizen First Consul, be assured that the 
Senate here speaks to you in the name of all citizens."  
The question was duly debated in the Tribunate, Carnot 
alone voting against the proposal, and by a decree of the 
Senate Napoleon was declared Empero r of the French on the 
18th May 1804. That a conspiracy and a "judicial murder" 
should herald so important an event was looked upon by some 
as of evil omen. A few of the more sober members of the 
nation began to whisper among themselves that France was 
being more and more absorbed in Napoleon. Perhaps the 
remark made by the Due de Raguse to the Comtesse de Boigne 
in 1814 would not have been inapplicable if uttered ten years 
before. The duke was explaining his connection with the 
Emperor. "When he said: 'All for France,'   I served with 
enthusiasm; when he said: 'France and I,'   I served with zeal; 
when he said 'I and France,'   I served with obedience; but 
when he said: 'I without France,'   I felt the necessity of 
separating from him."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  61 CHAPTER XVI 
THE THREAT ENED INVASION OF ENGLAND AND 
ITS SEQUEL  
(1804 -1805)  
Napoleon's first thought after he became Emperor was 
of the army, in very truth the ,d main support of his throne. He 
had seen too much of life to believe that his great commanders 
lived solely to carry o ut his will without reference to personal 
ambition. Experience had taught him that "men are fond of 
toys, and are led by them." He had remarked on the fact when 
opposition had been raised to the institution of the Legion of 
Honour in 1802, and he saw no re ason to change his opinion. 
Now was the moment for him to show that those who had 
contributed to the success of his designs upon the Imperial 
throne were not to be forgotten. He therefore elevated eighteen 
generals to the rank of Marshals of the Empire, na mely, 
Augereau, Bernadotte, Berthier, Bessieres, Brune, Davout, 
Jourdan, Kellermann, Lannes, Lefebvre, Massena, Moncey, 
Mortier, Murat, Ney, Perignon, Soult, and Serrurier. By 
honouring the heads of the army, Napoleon not only flattered 
them and pleased th e troops they commanded, but wove a 
silken cord which he hoped would bind them to himself. Some 
failed him in the evil days of 1814 -1815, but the majority were 
worthy of the distinction and of his confidence.  
A host of other dignitaries were created apart  from the 
Bonaparte family, whose members assumed the title of 
Imperial Highness, their mother being called Madame Mere, 
which was as simple and dignified as the good soul herself. 
There was a Grand Elector, Arch -Chancellor of the Empire, 
Arch -Chancellor o f State, and High Constable, to mention 
only a few of the many titles conferred at this time.  Napoleon paid frequent visits to Boulogne, and August 
1804 the vast camp was the scene of a grand review at which 
the crosses of the Legion of Honour were distri buted to those 
who had been awarded this coveted distinction. The most 
intense enthusiasm was aroused: the ancient throne of 
Dagobert, King of France eleven centuries before, was used by 
the Emperor, and the platform on which it stood was gaily 
decorated w ith two hundred flags. Unfortunately a catastrophe 
marred the occasion. A flotilla of new boats for the projected 
invasion was to arrive from Holland and elsewhere at the 
height of the proceedings. Sever? l of them struck a portion of 
the new harbour -works  and were swamped, causing Napoleon 
to lose his temper. The enjoyment of the open -air dinner was 
also marred by heavy rain.  
 
 
 
NAPOLEON  GIVING  THE EAGLES  TO HIS ARMY .  
Arrangements for an even more imposing ceremony 
were soon proceeding. This was the coronation of the 
Emperor, which took place in the cathedral of Notre Dame on 
Sunday, the 2nd December 1804, and the Pope, thinking it 
prudent to respond to Napoleon' s wish, graced the service with 
his presence. As the Emperor crowned both Josephine and 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  62 himself, the Sovereign Pontiff had to be content with anointing 
Napoleon and blessing the sword and sceptre. "Vive 
l'Empereur!" thundered through the magnificently deco rated 
cathedral, cannon were fired, and in the evening illuminations 
blazed forth all over Paris. It is said that when Napoleon 
retired to his apartment at the end of the day's proceedings he 
exclaimed in tones of scorn worthy of Cromwell on a 
celebrated o ccasion, "Off! Off with these confounded 
trappings!" His language always seemed more in keeping with 
the camp than with the court.  
One of Napoleon's first acts after his coronation was to 
write to George III. on the subject of peace, just as he had 
done w hen taking the reins of office as First Consul; it was his 
way of throwing dust in the eyes of the enemy. War had 
broken out between Great Britain and Spain at a most 
inopportune moment, for Pitt, who had again come into power, 
had energetically entered in to negotiations with some of the 
more important European Powers for a third Coalition against 
France. In April 1805, Russia signified her assent, and was 
followed in August by Austria. Great Britain agreed to 
replenish the war -chests of her allies, and, in  addition, to 
furnish men, arms, and ships. The political chessboard was in 
active use again, and with his usual astuteness Napoleon made 
several moves before his opponents were aware that the game 
had begun. On the 26th May he became King of Italy, placin g 
the crown on his own head in Milan Cathedral, and appointing 
Josephine's son, Eugene Beauharnais, to the important and 
scarcely enviable post of Viceroy Early in June the Ligurian 
Republic was united with France, followed later by Parma and 
Piacenza; and  Lucca and Piombino were created a principality, 
the Emperor's sister Elise being recognised as Hereditary 
Princess. Napoleon was "consolidating his interests," just as 
Pitt was following the same principle under somewhat 
different conditions. These aggres sive measures had an 
extremely irritating influence on Austria. But although her 
pride was severely shaken, she was slow to move. The army 
was encumbered by tradition, and the people, having been bitten, were twice shy. The old proverb, "Better half a loaf  
than no bread," fairly summed up the situation from their point 
of view. But what if the half loaf were taken? That side of the 
question had also to be considered.  
Shipbuilding still continued to proceed with unabated 
vigour along the coasts of Holland a nd of Northern France. 
Three -deckers, gay with new paint, left the slips and took their 
first plunge into sea -water. In the Texel, and at Brest, 
Rochefort, and Toulon, squadrons came into being, but, like 
unfledged birds in a cage, they had little opportun ity to try 
their wings. The men on England's floating bulwarks saw to 
that, watching every movement. When the various blockading 
squadrons had to vacate their station, as occasionally 
happened, the frigates, "the eyes of the fleet," as Nelson 
happily terme d them, were usually present, although he 
complained that he had far too few of these useful vessels at 
his disposal.  
Napoleon never thoroughly understood the difficulties 
of naval warfare. He was disposed to think that a naval 
squadron could carry out a manoeuvre with the almost 
mathematical exactness of a regiment. Tides and wind meant 
little or nothing to him; Sir Neil Campbell, the Commissioner 
at Elba for Great Britain during Napoleon's short -lived rule of 
that island, perceived and noted this in his diary. And yet it 
must be conceded that the strategy which the Emperor had 
been secretly conceiving for the concentration of his scattered 
fleets was as clever as it was bold. "The wet ditch that lay 
around England" was not to be crossed by the flotilla al one; he 
had long since abandoned that plan as impracticable. The navy 
proper was to have a share in the downfall of the United 
Kingdom. By feints in directions calculated to deceive the 
enemy as to his real designs he hoped to assemble sufficient 
ships to command the Channel, if only for a few days. This 
would enable him to slip across with his army, although how 
he proposed to get out of England is not quite clear. A 
sufficient military force was to be left in France to provide for 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  63 the possibility that oth er enemies might take advantage of so 
favourable an opportunity to cross the French frontiers.  
Napoleon's general design was changed again and 
again as circumstances dictated, and twice an attempt was 
made to rally the naval forces. Suffice it to say that  Missiessy 
with the Rochefort squadron eluded the English fleets and 
reached the West Indies, where he was to be joined by 
Villeneuve, his colleague at Toulon, the idea being that while 
the British were chasing them the ships at Brest under 
Ganteaume shoul d land a force in Ireland and afterwards 
return to convoy the flotilla. Villeneuve, owing to stress of 
weather, was forced to return to port, Ganteaume being 
hemmed in by Cornwallis, a hero who has not had full justice 
done to him, largely because the nava l annals of the time are 
dominated so completely by Nelson. Even the latter was 
deceived when he found Toulon empty, and he chased an 
entirely spectral fleet in the direction of Egypt, sufficient proof 
of the cleverness of Napoleon's elusive plan.  
In the early days of 1805 the Emperor determined to 
delay no further. He who said that "God is on the side of the 
biggest battalions" probably thought that the same maxim 
applied to fleets. The Spanish naval resources were now allied 
to those of France, making th em numerically stronger than 
those of the enemy, although decidedly deficient in fighting 
qualities and seamanship. In brief, Napoleon's last desperate 
attempt at the invasion of England was as follows: Villeneuve 
with the Toulon squadron, after joining th at at Cadiz, was to 
make for the West Indies, there to be met by Missiessy. 
Ganteaume, escaping from Brest, was to call at Ferrol for the 
vessels lying there and join the others, making fifty -nine first -
class ships in all, excluding frigates. The combined fleets were 
then to make a dash across the Atlantic and appear before 
Boulogne, where the flotilla would be in readiness to sail.  
Villeneuve carried out his part, but Missiessy and 
Ganteaume failed, the latter because he was unable to pierce 
the British c ordon. Napoleon, not to be discouraged, sent word to Villeneuve to come back, drive the British from their station 
off Ferrol, secure the fourteen ships in that harbour, repeat the 
operation at Brest, where there were twenty -one ships, and 
then make for Bo ulogne. Nelson had given chase and been 
outwitted, but by sending a swift -sailing brig to Plymouth to 
inform the authorities of his misfortune and the approach of 
the French fleet on its homeward voyage, they were enabled to 
order the British ships off Roc hefort and Ferrol to leave their 
position and intercept Villeneuve. This, under Admiral Calder, 
they were successful in doing, two Spanish ships being lost in 
the action that was fought. Owing to fog and want of 
confidence on Calder's part, however, the co ntest was 
indecisive, and the Frenchman reached the Spanish fort of 
Vigo, afterwards creeping into Ferrol, where fourteen sail -of-
the-line awaited him, the total force now being twenty -nine. 
Meanwhile five French ships which had been hemmed in at 
Rochefort , taking advantage of the absence of the British, were 
likely to join them, thus placing thirty -four vessels at 
Villeneuve's disposal for a dash to Brest. He made the attempt 
and failed, neglected to inform the commander of the 
Rochefort squadron, who was vainly searching for him, and 
retreated to Cadiz, where six Spanish ships were added to his 
squadron.  
Calder and Collingwood "sat tight" outside the harbour 
with one eye on the enemy and the other searching for signs of 
the British ships which they knew w ould be with them before 
long. Nelson, after spending a short time in England, hove in 
sight off Cadiz on the day before his forty -seventh birthday 
and assumed supreme command. The officers trooped into his 
cabin to congratulate him. "The reception I met w ith on 
joining the fleet," he declared, "caused the sweetest sensation 
of my life."  
On the 19th October the signal, "The enemy are 
coming out of port," flew from the mastheads of the frigates 
stationed to watch the goings -on in the harbour. Thirty -three 
sail-of-the-line, five frigates, and two brigs had passed out by 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  64 the following day. Nelson's force consisted of twenty -seven 
men-of-war, four frigates, a schooner, and a cutter. The enemy 
therefore had the advantage as regards numbers of six first -
class shi ps. In armament the combatants were nearly equal, as 
in bravery and daring, but the French were very inferior in 
seamanship and general morale. The 21st October 1805, on 
which the Battle of Trafalgar was fought, is a red -letter day in 
the history of the Br itish Empire, perhaps of the world. The 
story belongs rather to the life of Nelson than of Napoleon, 
and as such cannot be dealt with here. Eleven ships only 
escaped of the thirty -three which had ventured to contest 
England's command of the sea. The confli ct in Trafalgar Bay 
was Napoleon's maritime Waterloo. It cost the life of the 
greatest naval commander of modern times, but it sealed the 
supremacy of his country on the element which she has made 
particularly her own. On land, success still remained with the 
man whose gigantic schemes for invasion were so completely 
shattered; at sea, it was never to attend his efforts.  CHAPTER XVII  
THE WAR OF THE THIRD COALITION  
(1805 -6) 
Swift decision was as essentially a characteristic of 
Napoleon as was his policy of  having an alternative scheme to 
fall back upon should the first and more important plan 
miscarry. A typical example in which both are to be seen is 
afforded by a study of the War of the Third Coalition, against 
the allied Powers, Austria, Russia, and Grea t Britain. 
Disappointed at the failure of his preparations for the invasion 
of England, but clinging to his pet project, the humiliation of 
that country, the Emperor suddenly, and with apparently little 
forethought, led his legions in the opposite directio n. England 
remained unviolated, but he saw a chance of stealing a march 
on Austria, her faithful friend.  
On the 26th August, 1805, two days after the Elector of 
Bavaria had signified his intention of casting in his lot with 
France, the Army of England, ne ver destined to get nearer to 
the land whose name it bore than its headquarters at Boulogne, 
and now known as the Grand Army, began its long march 
from the coasts of the English Channel to the banks of the 
Danube. Napoleon's forces soon reached the enormou s total of 
200,000 men, the majority of whom, braced up by their long 
sojourn by the sea, were more fit physically for an arduous 
campaign than any other army in Europe. Despite defects in 
organisation and the free -and-easy methods of some of its 
officers,  the Grand Army was the army of achievement. It 
carried the eagles of France, not to one victory only, but to 
many. No armament since the dawn of history has failed to be 
criticised for its imperfections. It is easy to be drill -perfect, 
and yet to fail in the field.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  65 
 
 
NAPOLEON  DECORATING  HIS SOLDIERS  AT BOULOGNE .  
That the invasion of England was a mere feint has 
often been asserted, whereas the weight of evidence  is on the 
other side. The multitude of orders issued by Napoleon, the 
reckless expenditure of money on the flotilla and the 
enlargement of Boulogne harbour, the medal struck to 
commemorate the achievement destined never to be used, the 
determination with which he waited until the last moment for 
the appearance of his fleets, are surely sufficient proofs of his 
sincerity in the matter. Moreover, on its first campaign the 
Grand Army had to plunder or to starve because the 
commissariat arrangements were hopel essly inadequate, the 
greater part of the provisions being left on the coast. This in 
itself shows with what haste the camp was broken up and the 
march begun.  
The army was divided into seven corps commanded by 
tried warriors of France, namely, Ney, Lannes , Soult, Davout, 
Bernadotte, Marmont, and Augereau. Murat was placed at the 
head of the cavalry. With the Emperor was the magnificent 
Imperial Guard, at once the pride of Napoleon and of the 
whole army. The Bavarians numbered some 27,000.  
 
 
NAPOLEON  REVIEW S THE TROOPS  AT BOLOGNE .  
The Imperialists had two principal forces. That in Italy 
numbered nearly 100,000 troops, who were under Archduke 
Charles; the other in G ermany totaled 76,000, and was 
commanded in theory by Archduke Ferdinand. As the latter 
was a youth of nineteen summers the real work devolved on 
General Mack, chief of the staff, although the Archduke was 
responsible to the Emperor. Unfortunately Mack was  not 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  66 particularly popular, and consequently received but weak 
support from his immediate subordinates.  
The Austrian service was steeped in tradition and 
crowded with aristocratic nobodies. To be sure some of the 
cleverest officers had studied the men and methods of the all -
conquering French armies since the last campaign, but the 
quick movements of the enemy at once dismayed and deceived 
the slow -moving Imperialist columns. Augsburg was speedily 
occupied by the French; at Wertingen, Lannes cut up a 
divisio n; and Ulm, Mack's headquarters, was so completely at 
the mercy of the enemy's army owing to the rapid 
concentration of troops under Lannes, Soult, and Marmont that 
the unfortunate general speedily capitulated. He was made a 
scapegoat, court -martialed, dep rived of his rank, and placed in 
a fortress for two years.  
All these events happened within one month, and were 
the work of men who had been forced to provide themselves 
with most of their necessities. Bad weather had added to their 
troubles, marches had been made in torrents of rain, and the 
wind had sometimes been so boisterous as to prevent their 
lighting a fire by which to dry their soaking uniforms. Says a 
contemporary officer whose information is beyond dispute  
"To surround Ulm it was necessary to c oncentrate. 
Numerous columns defiled upon the same road, appeared at 
the same point. 100,000 men, fatigued by long marches, 
destitute of provisions, come to take up a position which 
grows more and more confined. They are now no more 
allowed to straggle fro m their post, for then the whole 
enterprise would fail. What a critical moment! The resources 
of the country occupied by this mass are consumed in an hour.  
"To enhance the difficulty, the heavens seem to 
dissolve. A heavy rain, continuing for many days, f loods the 
country. The streams burst their banks. The roads are frightful, 
and in more than one place altogether disappear. The army 
marches in mud, and bivouacks in water; it is ready to perish 
with misery and hunger; discouragement and murmuring spread t hrough it. What is to be done? A proclamation is read 
at the head of each column, which praises, flatters, and 
caresses the army, pours eulogy on its constancy, tells it the 
enemy is enclosed, and that only a few moments more of 
perseverance are needed. Th us the soldiers are kept quiet; but 
as they must have bread, active and intelligent officers are sent 
through all the neighbouring districts, to obtain it by threats, if 
requests fail. All yields to the power of requisition, and in 
twenty -four hours bread is procured, and the horses and 
vehicles of the inhabitants are used to bring it in. . . . Ulm is 
invested, blockaded, capitulates, and the French army reap the 
fruit of its endurance and of its incredible activity."  
Napoleon next turned his attentions to  the Russians 
under Kutusoff, who had now entered the field on behalf of 
their allies, trusting to disappoint their hopes as speedily as he 
had dispersed those of the Austrians. Time was all -important, 
as extensive reinforcements were shortly expected by t he 
enemy. Without scruple or qualms of conscience some of the 
French forces under Bernadotte were therefore marched 
through the neutral territory of Prussia. It was unjustifiable, of 
course, but Napoleon made no apologies for treading on 
national corns. By  the middle of November the Emperor was 
in Vienna, no opposition being offered.  
In Italy all was not quite so well. Massena was unable 
to overcome the Austrian forces under Archduke Charles at 
Caldiero, which retreated in good order to Laybach. There 
they concentrated with Archduke John, who had been driven 
from Tyrol with severe losses by Ney and the Bavarians. After 
failing to bring hostilities to a conclusion by diplomatic 
measures, and foreseeing a winter campaign which would in 
all probability prove a  protracted one, Napoleon determined, 
as on many other occasions, to put all to the hazard in an 
attempt to bring the contest to an end by a crushing victory. 
His forces were necessarily widely scattered, but 65,000 
troops were available, whereas the allie s had some 90,000. On 
the morning of the 2nd December, 1805, the rays of the sun 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  67 quickly dispelled the mist which hung about the plateau of 
Pratzen—"the sun of Austerlitz," as the Emperor frequently 
termed it in later campaigns.  
Rapp, with the authority o f an eye -witness, thus 
describes "The Day of the Anniversary," as many of the 
soldiers called the battle, because Napoleon had been crowned 
just twelve months before:  
"When we arrived at Austerlitz, the Russians, ignorant 
of the Emperor's skilful disposit ions to draw them to the 
ground which he had marked out, and seeing our advanced 
guards give way before their columns, they conceived the 
victory won. According to their notions, the advanced guard 
would suffice to secure an easy triumph. But the battle 
began—they found what it was to fight, and on every point 
were repulsed. At one o'clock the victory was still un certain; 
for they fought admirably. They resolved on a last effort, and 
directed close masses against our centre. The Imperial Guard 
deployed: ar tillery, cavalry, infantry were marched against a 
bridge which the Russians attacked, and this movement, 
concealed from Napoleon by the inequality of the ground, was 
not observed by us. At this moment I was standing near him, 
waiting orders. We heard a wel l-maintained fire of musketry; 
the Russians were repulsing one of our brigades. Hearing this 
sound, the Emperor ordered me to take the Mamelukes, two 
squadrons of Chasseurs, one of Grenadiers of the Guard, and 
to observe the state of things.  
 
"I set off a t full gallop, and, before advancing a 
cannon -shot, perceived the disaster. The Russian cavalry had 
penetrated our squares, and were sabring our men. In the 
distance could be perceived masses of Russian cavalry and 
infantry in reserve. At this juncture, th e enemy advanced; four 
pieces of artillery arrived at a gallop, and were planted in 
position against us. On my left I had the brave Morland, on my 
right General d'Allemagne. 'Courage, my brave fellows!' cried 
I to my party; 'behold your brothers, your frie nds butchered; let us avenge them, avenge our standards! Forward!' These 
few words inspired my soldiers; we dashed at full speed upon 
the artillery, and took them. The enemy's horse, which awaited 
our attack, were overthrown by the same charge, and fled in  
confusion, galloping, like us, over the wrecks of our own 
squares. In the meantime the Russians rallied; but, a squadron 
of Horse Grenadiers coming to our assistance, I could then 
halt, and wait the reserves of the Russian Guard.  
 
 
 
THE NIGHT  BEFORE  AUSTERLITZ .  
"Again we charged, and this charge was terrible. The 
brave Morland fell by my side. It was absolute butchery. We 
fought man to man, and so mingled togeth er, that the infantry 
on neither side dared to fire, lest they should kill their own 
men. The intrepidity of our troops finally bore us in triumph 
over all opposition: the enemy fled in disorder in sight of the 
two Emperors of Austria and Russia, who had t aken their 
station on a rising ground in order to be spectators of the 
contest. They ought to have been satisfied, for I can assure you 
they witnessed no child's play. For my own part . . . I never 
passed so delightful a day. The Emperor received me most 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  68 graciously when I arrived to tell him that the victory was ours; 
I still grasped my broken sabre, and as this scratch upon my 
head bled very copiously, I was all covered with blood. He 
named me General of Division. The Russians returned not 
again to the cha rge—they had had enough; we captured 
everything, their cannon, their baggage, their all in short; and 
Prince Ressina was among the prisoners."  
The total loss of the allies reached the amazing figure 
of 26,000, or not quite four times as many as that susta ined by 
the victors. The story told of Napoleon that when the fugitives 
of the defeated armies were endeavouring to cross the frozen 
surface of Lake Satschan he ordered the artillery of his Guard 
to fire on the ice, thereby drowning the poor wretches, has 
now been proved apocryphal.  
Those who have read Macaulay's Essays   will perhaps 
remember an anecdote introduced to show that exact 
fulfilment of certain rules does not necessarily constitute 
success. "We have heard of an old German officer," he relates, 
"who was a great admirer of correctness in military operations. 
He used to revile Bonaparte for spoiling the science of war, 
which had been carried to such exquisite perfection by 
Marshal Daun. 'In my youth he used to march and 
countermarch all the summer w ithout gaining or losing a 
square league, and then we went into winter quarters. And 
now comes an ignorant, hot -headed young man, who flies 
about from Boulogne to Ulm, and from Ulm to the middle of 
Moravia, and fights battles in December. The whole system of 
his tactics is monstrously incorrect.' The world is of opinion in 
spite of critics like these, that the end of war is to conquer, and 
that those means are the most correct which best accomplish 
the ends." Napoleon was great enough to break rules which a  
man of mediocre ability would not dare to defy. This is the 
secret of the Emperor's skill in warfare, of his short but 
decisive campaigns which astonished officers of less intuition 
and daring.  After Austerlitz an armistice was arranged, followed 
on the 26th December 1805, by the signature of the Peace of 
Pressburg. Venetia, Istria, and Dalmatia were ceded by Austria 
to Italy; Bavaria gained Tyrol and Vorarlberg; Baden and 
Wurtemberg also came in for a share of the spoil, and their 
rulers, hitherto styled  Electors, became Kings. Prussia, 
deeming it wiser to appear as a strong ally than as a weak 
neutral, attached herself to the Nation of Conquests, although 
Frederick William had been within an ace of declaring war 
before Austerlitz. An offensive and defens ive alliance was first 
drawn up, then the former clause was struck out, it being 
arranged that the respective territories of the countries should 
be held sacred. Hanover was handed over to Prussia in 
exchange for the territories of Cleves and Neuchatel, An spach 
was ceded to Bavaria, and the principal rivers were closed to 
British commerce.  
This high -handed action was partly nullified by a strict 
blockade on the part of Great Britain and Sweden, and many 
Prussian ships were secured as prizes. King Frederick  William 
III. speedily began to regret his bargain with Napoleon, and 
with the genius for double -dealing so often characteristic of 
weak men, he came to a secret understanding with the Czar, 
promising among other things that he would refuse to attack 
Russi a should he be called upon to do so by Napoleon. On his 
part, Alexander was to come to the help of the House of 
Hohenzollern should it need assistance. Time was to teach 
them, as it does most individuals, that "no man can serve two 
masters."  
Napoleon now parcelled out territory for the special 
benefit of his family and friends. Joseph Bonaparte became 
King of the Two Sicilies in April 1806, Naples having been 
occupied by French troops under Saint -Cyr. In the following 
June Louis ascended the throne of Holl and. Caroline 
Bonaparte, now married to Murat, was granted the Grand 
Duchy of Berg and Cleves the same year. Pauline was given 
the miniature Duchy of Guastalla, near Parma. To Berthier 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  69 Napoleon presented the principality of Neuchatel, to 
Talleyrand that of  Benevento. Their power was somewhat 
limited, it is true, but it pleased the recipients of the honours 
for a time, and put gold in their purses, which was perhaps 
even more desirable from their point of view.  
Napoleon was putting into practice the theory he had 
propounded in 1804 when he said "there will be no rest in 
Europe until it is under a single chief —an Emperor who shall 
have Kings for officers, who shall distribute kingdoms to his 
lieutenants, and shall make this one King of Italy, that one of 
Bava ria, this one ruler of Switzerland, that one Governor of 
Holland, each having an office of honour in the Imperial 
household."  CHAPTER XVIII  
THE PRUSSIAN CAMPAIGN  
(1806)  
Pitt breathed his last soon after the defeat of the allies 
at Austerlitz, and three m onths after the death of Nelson. Lord 
Chatham's son, no less a martyr to his country than the hero of 
Trafalgar, had been bent "on putting Europe to rights." 
Scarcely had 1806 been ushered in before the Emperor of the 
French gave fresh evidence to the worl d that he, too, had a 
similar ambition. Austria, still smarting from the wounds 
inflicted by the lash Napoleon had so unsparingly used, an 
invalid not yet convalescent, and unable to offer any 
resistance, was again the victim.  
For many centuries the rulin g King of Austria had been 
Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, although many of the 
German States had become practically independent in all but 
name. It was here that the ruler of France did not hesitate to 
wound. To strengthen his position he formed the 
Confederation of the Rhine, whereby sixteen states of various 
sizes, including Bavaria, Wurtemberg, Baden, and Hesse -
Darmstadt severed themselves from the Germanic Empire and 
entered into an offensive and defensive alliance with him as 
Protector. The new arra ngement added 63,000 soldiers to 
Napoleon's reserves, and provided additional barriers against 
his enemies. On his part he agreed in case of war to put 
200,000 men in the field on behalf of the Confederation. Well 
might the Prussian minister at Paris asser t that his master "saw 
around his territories none but French soldiers or vassals of 
France, ready to march at her beck." Prussia was almost 
hemmed in by the new Confederation; moreover the Grand 
Army continued to remain in Germany.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  70 For a month or two the re was a faint glimmer of hope 
that the continued war between France and England might 
cease. Charles James Fox, Foreign Secretary and leading 
figure in the Grenville administration, was not without 
admiration for Napoleon, and more or less informal 
negoti ations for peace were opened. There was an exchange of 
courtesies, Fox sending particulars of a plot to assassinate the 
Emperor to Talleyrand, Napoleon releasing a few British 
prisoners from French fortresses. When Napoleon really 
showed his hand he disclo sed a suspicious eagerness to obtain 
Sicily, the possession of which would be of great importance 
in his cherished scheme of establishing the supremacy of 
France in the Mediterranean. The Emperor hungered and 
thirsted after sea -power; it was the one world left for him to 
conquer.  
Hanover was held out as bait to Great Britain, quite 
regardless of anything Prussia might have to say in the matter. 
It was this unscrupulous juggling with other folk's possessions 
on the part of Napoleon that kept the Continent i n so unsettled 
a state. None knew who next might be bartered or overrun by 
French troops, irrespective of previous agreements. When 
Napoleon played cards he cheated; in political matters his 
morality was no more conspicuous. His sense of right and 
wrong ha d long since given way to an egotism which 
recognised no law, and placed himself above all codes of 
ordinary conduct. De Tocqueville said of him: "He was as 
great as a man can be without virtue."  
The peace overtures came to nought. The King of 
Prussia ent ered into an alliance with Russia, and began to 
mobilize his army. His soldiers were for up and doing 
regardless of the consequences, and effected a foolish disdain 
of their antagonists which is well shown by Varnhagen von 
Ense, then a student at Halle, in  his Memoirs .  
"During the whole summer," he relates, "we had heard 
of warlike movements interrupted by hopes of peace; but after 
Napoleon had obtained a firm footing in Germany by means of the Rhenish Confederation, all idea of peace was at an end, 
and ev ery one in Prussia called loudly for war. Prussian troops 
were to be seen in and near Halle on their way to the south and 
west, and the desire for war grew stronger every day. Some 
hot-headed fellows were furious if peace was hinted at, or if 
the superiori ty of the Prussians over the French was not at 
once acknowledged. I distinctly remember meeting an officer 
who asserted that the war was as good as ended —that nothing 
could now save Bonaparte from certain destruction. When I 
attempted to talk of French gen erals, he interrupted me by 
saying, 'Generals! whence should they spring? We Prussians, 
if you like it, have generals who understand the art of war; 
who have served from their youth up: such men will drive the 
tinkers and tailors, who date only from the Re volution, before 
them like sheep. . . .' This put me out of temper, and I 
answered bluntly, that a man became a general not by accident 
of birth, but by actual service; that a man's former condition 
was nothing; a tinker or a tailor might make as good a ge neral 
as a drill sergeant."  
The reference to "accident of birth" is to the fact that 
before the battle of Jena (1806) practically every Prussian 
officer was an aristocrat, a rule which it will be remembered 
from a previous reference in this work obtained in the French 
army before the Revolution.  
During a journey to Berlin, undertaken in his holidays, 
Varnhagen tells us that he was "reminded all along the road, 
that we were on the eve of some great event; in every direction 
we met soldiers in larger or sma ller detachments, with artillery 
and baggage waggons. In Treuenbriezen I saw old Field 
Marshal von Mullendorf on his way to join the army; war was 
no longer doubtful, and it was thought that the presence of one 
of Frederick the Great's heroes would fill th e troops with the 
enthusiasm of that period, and incite them to fresh victories. I 
saw him with a smiling countenance making the most 
confident promises of victory out of his carriage window to 
the surrounding crowd; he then drove off amid the loud huzzas 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  71 of the assembled multitude. The soldiers were singing jovial 
songs, and rejoicing that at last they were to be led against the 
enemy; everywhere were to be seen the stragglers and others 
rushing to join the army. The noise died away after leaving 
Potsdam—an unusual stillness prevailed, and the fine summer 
weather soon banished from my thoughts all save the objects 
and expectations which more immediately concerned myself."  
Music and merriment were not to last for long. All too 
soon sunshine turned to rain, pride of race to national disaster. 
But it taught the Prussians a lesson they never forgot, even if 
they were slow to learn, and the full fruits of it were reaped on 
the field of Waterloo nine years later.  
At first Napoleon felt confident that the militar y 
preparations in Prussia were nothing but bluff, and although 
war was decided upon at Berlin on the 7th August 1806, and 
an ultimatum sent to Paris on the 25th September, it was not 
until the 7th October that Napoleon heard of it, for he was then 
with his  army. By the following day many of his troops had 
crossed the frontier. His fighting force numbered, in all, some 
190,000 men, that of his opponents some 40,000 less, under 
the chief command of the Duke of Brunswick, a veteran over 
seventy years of age wh o had seen service in the wars of the 
Warrior King. With the French eagles marched many soldiers 
of the Confederation, evidence of the value of the policy of 
Napoleon to surround himself with vassal states. It was a 
somewhat one -sided bargain, for it was c onsiderably more 
likely that he, in pursuing his aggressive projects, would call 
upon his allies more frequently than they upon him. Prussia 
was aided by Russia in the later stages of the campaign, for it 
was not until after the battle of Jena that the Cza r's slow -
moving forces were available. Saxony completed what might 
have been a most formidable triple alliance.  
The Prussian general's great hope was that he might be 
able to cut off Napoleon's communications with France, but he 
was far too cumbersome in his movements to catch so nimble 
an adversary. The Emperor divined the plan, gave orders for an immediate concentration of his troops, and turned the tables 
by threatening the Prussian communications with Berlin. To 
Bernadotte was given the task of clearin g the way for the main 
army. On the 9th October an affray took place between 
Saalburg and Schleiz, where there was an extensive wood, and 
the Prussians were forced to give way after a lengthy 
resistance. The French afterwards marched to Schleiz and 
carried  the place. Murat, who had put himself in possession of 
Saalburg on the previous day, also accomplished much 
difficult work. More important was the action fought near 
Saalfeld between Lannes and Suchet and Prince Louis 
Ferdinand of Prussia, in which the yo ung prince —he was but 
thirty -three years of age —lost his life while fighting against 
desperate odds. The infantry he commanded fell into disorder, 
and soon got altogether out of hand. The Prince had now but 
five squadrons of cavalry on which he could rely,  and he 
determined to die rather than surrender. He gave the order to 
charge, was wounded in several places, and at last fell from his 
horse, the victim of a fatal sword -thrust from a hussar. He 
certainly exhibited the contempt for death which Napoleon 
recommended to his chasseurs about this time. "My lads," said 
he, "you must not fear death; when soldiers brave death, they 
drive him into the enemy's ranks."  
The campaign was speedily decided. While the 
Emperor was closing upon the allied forces concentrate d near 
Weimar and Jena under the King and Prince Hohenlohe 
respectively, a very foolish movement was decided upon. A 
large portion of the Prussian forces were detached for the 
relief of Naumburg, leaving but 47,000 men to face the French 
should they appear . The unexpected happened; for on the same 
day the Landgrafenberg, a steep hill whose summit, wellnigh 
inaccessible but commanding a magnificent bird's -eye view of 
the army Napoleon had marked for destruction, was 
unexpectedly occupied by the French. Almos t superhuman 
exertion was required to haul up the heavy artillery so that it 
might be placed in the most advantageous positions for the 
coming conflict. Napoleon invariably discarded his trappings 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  72 of state during a campaign and assumed the duties of a 
comm on soldier when necessity demanded, as on this 
occasion. He showed himself ready and willing to take his 
share in what the troops called "the dirty work." He laid mines 
for the blasting of rocks which blocked progress up the rugged 
heights, tugged at the r opes by which the cannon were hauled 
to the wind -swept ridge, and did not retire to his tent until he 
was perfectly satisfied in his own mind that nothing had been 
left undone which might contribute to the discomfiture of the 
enemy.  
The story is told by M arbot, who, if he tells the truth, 
performed prodigies of valour worthy of D'Artagnan himself. 
A village priest pointed out the path which enabled the French 
troops to ascend the Landgrafenberg. "Up this path," the genial 
Marshal relates, "he led some offi cers of the staff and a 
company of voltigeurs. The Prussians, believing it to be 
impracticable, had neglected to guard it. Napoleon judged 
otherwise, and, on the report of the officers, went himself to 
see it, accompanied by Marshal Lannes and guided by th e 
cure. He found that between the top of the path and the plain 
occupied by the enemy, there was a small rocky platform; and 
on this he determined to assemble a part of his troops, who 
should sally forth from it, as from a citadel, to attack the 
Prussians.  For any one except Napoleon, commanding 
Frenchmen, the task would have been impossible; but he, 
sending to the engineers and artillery for four thousand 
pioneer's tools, set the infantry to work to widen and level the 
path, the battalions taking it in tur n, each one for an hour, and 
as it finished its task, advancing in silence and forming on the 
top of the hill. . . . The nights were very long at this season of 
the year, and there was plenty of time to make the path 
practicable not only for columns of inf antry, but for artillery 
and ammunition waggons; so that before daybreak the troops 
were massed on the Landgrafenberg. The term massed was 
never more correct, for the breasts of the men in each regiment 
were almost touching the backs of those in front of t hem. But 
the troops were so well disciplined that, in spite of the darkness and the packing of more than 40,000 men on the 
narrow platform, there was not the least disorder, and although 
the enemy who were occupying Cospoda and Closevitz were 
only half a c annon -shot off, they perceived nothing."  
In the plain below the flaming bivouac fires winked 
and blinked like watch -dogs at the Prussian soldiers. Some had 
already taken an unconscious farewell of the stars as their 
weary eyelids closed upon a scene of na tural beauty marred by 
the stacks of arms, parks of artillery and baggage waggons, 
which told of imminent strife and bloodshed.  
At four o'clock in the morning, ere the faintest streak of 
dawn had pierced the sky, the French camp was astir, and 
Napoleon wi th it. Had a dragon breathing fire and brimstone 
presented itself on the field of Jena Prince Hohenlohe could 
not have been more surprised than when the French advance 
guard suddenly appeared out of a heavy, rolling, autumn mist. 
The death -dealing guns beg an their work, the cavalry and 
infantry on either side fought with desperation, and the battle 
inclined first to the one side, then to the other. The Prussian 
troops showed that notwithstanding long years of inaction 
there was still some of the blood and i ron of Unser Fritz left in 
them; but before the reserve of 20,000 under Michel, for 
whom Hohenlohe had sent, came up, he had been obliged to 
write a second despatch urging haste, and confiding the news 
that the French cavalry "has driven into one confused mass the 
infantry, cavalry, and artillery." When the reserve appeared on 
the field the addition of so large a number of men tended to 
steady the Prussians, and it was on seeing them that an 
impetuous young French officer, noting the effect, shouted: 
"Forwa rd! Forward!" to the Imperial Guard, which had not yet 
been used. "How now?" asked Napoleon. "What beardless boy 
is this who ventures to counsel his Emperor? Let him wait till 
he has commanded in thirty pitched battles before he proffers 
his advice!"  
The day was definitely decided by a magnificent 
cavalry charge led by Murat, which caused a rout that only 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  73 ended at Weimar, the home of the immortal Goethe, six 
leagues away.  
"The Emperor," says Savary, "at the point where he 
stood, saw the flight of the Prus sians, and our cavalry taking 
them by thousands. Night was approaching; and here, as at 
Austerlitz, he rode round the field of battle. He often alighted 
from his horse to give a little brandy to the wounded; and 
several times I observed him putting his han d into the breast of 
a soldier to ascertain whether his heart beat, because, in 
consequence of having seen some slight colour in his cheeks, 
he supposed he might not be dead. In this manner I saw him 
two or three times discover men who were still alive. On  these 
occasions, he gave way to a joy it is impossible to describe."  
At the same time another battle had been fought and 
lost by the Prussians not more than twelve miles distant from 
the scene of this terrible carnage. Davout had received 
instructions to  march to Jena by a route which would enable 
him to fall on the enemy's rear while Napoleon was engaging 
them. In endeavouring to carry out this manoeuvre the 
Marshal carne directly upon Frederick's army before 
Auerstadt. As regards material strength, the condition of things 
at Jena was completely reversed. Here, as we have seen, the 
Prussians were in the minority; at Auerstadt the French were 
very much weaker. Both sides fought well, and proved 
themselves worthy of their countrymen who were engaged in a 
similar struggle only a few leagues away, but when the 
survivors of the two Prussian armies met it was as fugitives 
with the common desire to put as great a distance between 
them and their pursuers as possible. The King, Prince Henry, 
Prince William, and Mar shal Mollendorf were wounded, the 
Duke of Brunswick and General Schmettau died as a result of 
injuries they received, and despite the inability of Davout to 
continue the pursuit of the stricken enemy, the corpses of 
20,000 Prussians covered the fields of J ena and Auerstadt, lay 
in ditches, or almost blocked the roads. Many guns and 
colours fell to the spoil of the victors. What would have happened had Bernadotte and his cavalry come up is too 
horrible to contemplate.  
It is almost impossible to overstate th e dreadful 
position in which the people of Prussia now found themselves. 
Mr (afterwards Sir) George Jackson, who had been sent by 
Fox to obtain accurate information as to what was passing in 
Germany, confides to his Diary under date Hamburg, October 
23rd: "Everybody is in despair, everything is upset by the late 
disaster that has fallen on the country. . . . The letters from 
Berlin speak of a state of ferment that is indescribable."  
On the 25th October the French entered the capital. In 
their despairing co ndition the good folk of Berlin appear rather 
to have welcomed the invaders than otherwise. We will let our 
friend the Halle student tell us what happened. "I saw the first 
French who entered the town," he writes. "At about midday an 
officer, in a blue uni form, accompanied by three or four 
chasseurs, rode into the town; they stopped their horses, 
hurriedly asked the way towards the municipality, or the 
mansion -house, told the idlers to stand off, and galloped away 
again. There they were then! Many people st ill maintained that 
these were not French, but Russians. This was evident, said 
they, from their green uniforms. But in a quarter of an hour 
there was no longer room for doubt; large bodies of cavalry 
and infantry entered the town, and on the following day  Berlin 
was filled with Marshal Davout's troops. And now began a 
totally new life among the half -stupefied inhabitants of Berlin. 
We breathed again; for, instead of wild unprincipled 
plunderers, we found a well -disciplined gay soldiery, who 
were disarmed b y being addressed in French, and whose 
officers were, for the most part, remarkable for courteous 
manners. This first favourable impression was not effaced by 
subsequent rough conduct, although it was difficult to satisfy 
the pressing want of so many peopl e. We still found that we 
had to thank God, if we were to have enemies quartered upon 
us, that they were not worse than these. Nevertheless, the 
slovenly, dirty, ragged appearance of these little, mean -
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  74 looking, impudent, witty fellows, was a strange sight for eyes 
which, like ours, had been used to the neatness and admirable 
carriage of the Prussians, and we were the more astonished 
how such rabble —for they almost deserved the name —could 
have beaten such soldiers out of the field. . .  
"On the 27th October, " he continues, "I was taking my 
usual evening walk by the so -called Lustgarten, or park, when 
I was struck by a new sight. The whole space in the middle, 
which had been always kept carefully mown, and even the 
sidewalks towards the palace, were covered wi th innumerable 
watch -fires, round which the soldiers of the Imperial Guard 
were grouped in all kinds of attitudes. The huge fires shone 
upon these handsome men and their glittering arms and 
accoutrements, and the eyes were attracted by the incessantly 
recurring national colours of red, blue and white. About 
10,000 men were moving about in this glowing bivouac, near 
the gloomy -looking palace in which Napoleon had taken up 
his abode. The whole scene made a strong impression upon 
me, and when I examined the sm all details —for every one was 
allowed to go among the troops —my wonder was increased; 
each soldier, in appearance, manner, and authority, was like an 
officer—each man seemed a commander, a hero. The men 
sang, danced, and feasted till late in the night, whi le every now 
and then small detachments, in an admirable state of 
discipline, marched to and fro with drums and music. It was 
such a sight as I had never beheld. I stayed there for hours, and 
could scarcely leave the spot. The Imperial Guard remained 
there  for some days, and all eyes were riveted by the beautiful 
but hated spectacle. But no subsequent impression equaled that 
of the first night: the fires burned more dimly; part of the 
troops had been detached elsewhere; and at length, small 
bodies of cavalr y, with their horses ready saddled and bridled 
for instant service, were the only troops left in this 
encampment. The numerous bodyguard in the court of the 
palace was quite sufficient for Napoleon's personal safety."  But we must return to war and to mise ry. Strongholds 
which had hitherto been thought wellnigh impregnable fell 
with sickening regularity. Magdeburg, for instance, 
surrendered ingloriously to Marshal Ney, and the garrison of 
24,000 able -bodied men marched out and laid down their 
weapons, as di d 10,000 troops at Erfurt. Custrin, reputed to be 
one of the strongest fortresses on the Oder, was handed over to 
some forty chasseurs, Stettin surrendered in the same 
despicable manner. Soult at Nordhausen, Bernadotte at Halle, 
and Murat and Lannes at Pre nzlow won important victories 
which still further weighed down the scales against Prussia. It 
seemed as though the army which had started out with so 
much noise and bragging would disappear almost to a man. 
One fragment still remained, that under Blucher, the rugged 
old soldier who was to be in the chase when the fox was at last 
run to earth at Waterloo. His total force amounted to about 
24,000 men, against whom 60,000 troops under Soult, Murat, 
and Bernadotte were pitted. On the 6th November 1806, the 
latter slaughtered many of the harassed Prussians in the narrow 
streets of Lubeck, but Blucher did not capitulate until the 
following day, when he was absolutely compelled to do so by 
the limits of Prussian territory.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  75 CHAPTER XIX 
THE POLISH CAMPAIGN  
(1806 -7) 
Having deprived the Elector of Hesse -Cassel, the Duke 
of Brunswick, and the Prince of Orange of their possessions; 
concluded an alliance with Saxony, whose Elector was raised 
to the dignity of King and joined the Rhenish Confederacy; 
and compelled the Pru ssian provincial authorities to swear 
allegiance preparatory to leaving General Clarke as Governor -
General, Napoleon turned his unwearied attention to Poland. 
There he anticipated meeting the slow -moving Russian army 
before it reached Germany. The Commande r-in-chief of the 
Czar's forces was Marshal Kamenskoi, a man of eighty years 
of age, who shortly afterwards became insane, and was 
succeeded by Bennigsen, on whom the soldiers placed 
considerably more reliance.  
The partition of Poland by Russia, Austria a nd Prussia 
in 1795—a wound by no means healed —afforded an 
opportunity, had Napoleon decided to take advantage of it, for 
an appeal to the national spirit of the Poles to assert itself to 
regain their country's independence, an aspiration which is 
alive to -day. The Emperor sought to temporise, and when an 
influential deputation waited upon him to ask his assistance for 
the Poles, he evaded the point by a skilful answer which 
neither said yea nor nay to their request, but was nicely 
calculated to secure their  enthusiasm on his behalf. The truth 
is, that while Napoleon did not disdain Polish recruits for the 
French army, he perceived that it would have been dangerous 
to further exasperate Russia, Prussia, and Austria. Indeed, 
Austria was arming already, Prussia  was endeavouring to 
recuperate, and Russia was preparing a surprise.  The numerical strength of the various armies was, as 
far as can be ascertained, as follows: France, 145,000; Russia, 
100,000; Prussia, 15,000. The Emperor's first head -quarters 
were at Posen, but on Murat entering Warsaw at the end of 
November 1806, after some desultory fighting, he decided to 
move to that city, where he arrived with his staff on the 18th 
December. At Pultusk, Lannes experienced a severe check at 
the hands of Bennigsen, whose troops outnumbered the French 
by 5000. A violent snow -storm made the work doubly heavy 
for both contestants, but the Russians had fewer difficulties to 
contend with than the attacking party, which was obliged to, 
wade through slush that numbed the so ldiers to the bone. They 
quitted themselves well, however, and forced the enemy to 
retreat until the cavalry and reserve were brought into action, 
when the French were forced to give up the unequal contest 
with the loss of 6000 men, one thousand more than that of the 
Russians. At Golymin, a somewhat similar disaster occurred to 
Davout, Augereau, and Murat, and these two misfortunes 
largely determined Napoleon to suspend hostilities for a time. 
Both armies therefore took up winter quarters, Napoleon on 
the f orest -clad banks of the Vistula, the Russians near the 
Narew.  
Bennigsen, now in chief command, knowing the 
almost desperate situation of the King of Prussia, who was 
shut up in Konigsberg, upon which the divisions of Ney and 
Bernadotte were slowly closing , saw what he thought was an 
excellent opportunity to surprise Napoleon. He would assume 
the offensive, relieve the important fortress of Graudentz, then 
feebly held by a Prussian garrison, and protect Konigsberg. 
But the Emperor, whilst enjoying the socia l life of Warsaw, 
was not to be caught quite so easily, and was speedily on the 
march. Through a despatch from Bernadotte, which was 
intercepted by a band of Cossacks, the Russian general got to 
know of the enemy's movements, and perforce had to give up 
his former plan or run the risk of a disastrous defeat. Many a 
game of military hide -and-seek followed, often accompanied 
by severe losses. Matters were brought to a crisis on the 7th 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  76 February 1807, when both armies bivouaced within sight of 
each other at Ey lau, the French to the number of 50,000 
entering the town after an affray with the Russians, who 
probably totaled about 75,000. The corps under Ney, 
Bernadotte, and Davout, having been ordered to join the main 
force, were expected to afford valuable help.  
Never was there a more keenly -contested field. It was 
snowing heavily when the first shells began to plough the 
opposing ranks. In a single charge nearly half the men in 
Augereau's corps were annihilated, and their commander 
wounded. Davout returned the c ompliment, and was on the 
point of succeeding when the Russians received 
reinforcements and compelled him to fall back. Ney, who had 
duly arrived, and Murat, were more successful, but at the end 
of eighteen hours' fighting it was difficult to tell who had 
secured the advantage. Napoleon frankly confessed that it was 
quite possible he might have retreated, but when the next 
morning dawned, leaden and sullen, it was found that the 
Russians had disappeared, leaving him in possession of the 
field. On the 14th, Napoleon wrote to the Empress: "The 
country is covered with the dead and the wounded. This is not 
the pleasant part of war," while to his brother Joseph, he 
related some of the hardships of the campaign. "The officers of 
the staff," he says, "have not undr essed for two months, many 
not for four months. I myself have not taken off my boots for a 
fortnight. We are in the midst of snow and mud, without wine, 
brandy, or bread. We have nothing but potatoes to eat; we 
make long marches and counter -marches—no plea sant 
experience. We have to fight with the bayonet under a 
tremendous fire of grape, the wounded have then to be carried 
back 150 miles in open sleighs."  
An incident which occurred at this period exemplifies 
very clearly how Napoleon could rebuke an offic er and show 
at the same time that he had not forfeited his trust in him. It 
should be added that the Emperor did not always deal so leniently with a subordinate as he did with this particular 
individual.  
One evening a bundle of despatches was delivered to  
Napoleon. "Surely these despatches have been a long time on 
their way!" he remarked to his attendant. "How is this? Tell 
the orderly officer who brought them that I wish to speak to 
him."  
The officer entered, mud -bespattered and obviously ill 
at ease.  
"Sir," said the Emperor, "at what hour were these 
despatches placed in your hands?"  
"At eight o'clock in the evening, sire."  
"And how many leagues had you to ride?"  
"I do not know precisely, sire."  
"But you ought to know, sir. An orderly officer ought 
to know that. I know it. You had twenty -seven miles to ride, 
and you set off at eight o'clock. Look at your watch, sir. What 
o'clock is it, now?"  
"Half -past twelve, sire. The roads were in a terrible 
state. In some places the snow obstructed my passage —"  
"Poor excuses, sir —poor excuses. Retire, and await my 
orders."  
As the door closed behind the unfortunate messenger, 
whose unhappy frame of mind it is not difficult to realise, 
Napoleon remarked, "This cool, leisurely gentleman wants 
stimulating. The repri mand I have given him will make him 
spur his horse another time. Let me see —my answer must be 
delivered in _two hours. I have not a moment to lose."  
He replied to the communications and recalled the 
officer who had brought the despatches.  
"Set off immedi ately, sir," said the Emperor; "these 
despatches must be delivered with the utmost speed. General 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  77 Lasalle must receive my orders by three o'clock. You 
understand?"  
"Sire, by half -past two the general shall have the orders 
of which I have the honour to be the bearer."  
"Very well, sir, mount your horse —but stop!" he 
added, as the officer was about to make his exit. "Tell General 
Lasalle," and a magnetic smile lit up the Emperor's face for an 
instant, "that it will be agreeable to me that you should be the 
person selected to announce to me the success of these 
movements."  
After the terrible fight at Eylau, which proved that the 
French arms were not invincible and added considerably to the 
prestige of the Russian army, Napoleon felt compelled to 
concentrate h is forces still further. Although he was within an 
easy march of Konigsberg, upon which Bennigsen had 
retreated, and had promised his soldiers before the action that 
"their fatigue will be compensated by a luxurious and 
honourable repose" at that city, he determined to try Fortune 
no further. He put down the sword of war and took up the pen 
of peace, writing a letter to the King of Prussia calculated to 
woo him from his allies. After the triumph of Jena Napoleon 
had asked half of Prussia as the price of pea ce, now he was 
willing to give back all the conquered territory east of the river 
Elbe, and at the same time to release Prussia from any future 
strife he might have with Russia.  
We have already noted that Frederick William III. 
possessed little strength o f will, of which fact the Czar as well 
as Napoleon was fully aware. Alexander determined to make 
the alliance between Russia and Prussia still more binding, 
feeling confident that Eylau was the beginning of the end so 
far as the Corsican upstart was concer ned. The diplomacy of 
Napoleon received a check, and a treaty between Russia and 
Prussia was arranged at Bartenstein in April 1807, which, 
while it provided for eventualities which might follow the 
defeat of Napoleon, had the more immediate effect of 
stren gthening the wavering purpose of the Prussian monarch.  CHAPTER XX 
FRIEDLAND AND TILSIT 
(1807)  
Napoleon saw every reason for a speedy and more 
vigorous prosecution of the war, which threatened to be 
prolonged indefinitely. The ranks of his army had been 
seriously thinned, and although he had obtained 80,000 
conscripts but five months before, he found it necessary to call 
for a second levy of the same number, a very serious drain on 
the resources of France, for in the natural order of things the 
young men w ould not have been called upon until September 
1808, eighteen months later. The urgency of the demand is 
shown in the Emperor's despatch to Cambacerus: "It is very 
important that this measure should be adopted with alacrity. A 
single objection raised in th e Council of State or in the Senate 
would weaken me in Europe, and will bring Austria upon us. 
Then, it will not be two conscriptions, but three, or four, which 
we shall be obliged to decree, perhaps to no purpose, and to be 
vanquished at last." To talk of  defeat was not usual with 
Napoleon, and although he added that he was not going "to 
wage war with boys," he most certainly did so. In June 1807 
the total force at his disposal amounted to 310,000 troops, that 
of the allies 130,000 men.  
The capture of Kon igsberg not being practicable at the 
moment, the fall of Danzig, an important strategic point, was 
eagerly anticipated by Napoleon. The place had already 
endured several notable sieges, and notwithstanding Lefebvre's 
energetic measures he was not able to s end the good news that 
he had accomplished his purpose until the end of May 1807. 
The slow progress was partly due to the number of young, 
inexperienced soldiers with whom Lefebvre had to work, and 
also to a certain jealousy he manifested towards the engin eers, 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  78 the grenadiers being his favourites. "Your glory is in taking 
Danzig," Napoleon wrote to the old spit -fire. As 900 pieces of 
artillery were captured on the fall of the great fortress at the 
mouth of the Vistula, it must be conceded that the work was 
done well, if all too slowly for the patience of the Chief.  
On the 5th June Ney was surprised by a Russian force, 
the Marshal losing 2000 men. Five days later the troops under 
St Cyr and Legrand met with disaster, and 12,000 of the rank 
and file were kill ed, wounded, or taken prisoners. These 
reverses were followed by the frightful field of Friedland, 
fought on the 14th June, the situation for France being alone 
saved by the intrepidity of Victor. The Russians under 
Bennigsen, seconded by Prince Bagration,  behaved with 
exceptional bravery, retreating through water which reached 
nearly as high as their arms. Fifteen thousand of the enemy, 
including many who were drowned in their last desperate 
attempt to reach the opposite shore, were slain on this the 
anniv ersary of Marengo, and nearly 8000 Frenchmen fell.  
Jackson, who had remained in the ill -fated city of 
Konigsberg until the last moment, tells the story of Friedland 
in his Diary, and as he had every opportunity of obtaining 
facts at first hand, we will le t him relate further particulars of 
the tragedy:  
"However great the loss sustained by the allies at 
Friedland, and it cannot be put at less than twenty -four 
thousand in killed, wounded, prisoners and missing, yet 
everything that valour and bravery could e ffect was achieved 
by them; and had the activity and ability of their leader borne 
any proportion to the courage of his troops, this battle, as 
disastrous as that of Austerlitz or Auerstadt, would have been 
as glorious for us, and as important in its conse quences, as 
those were for the French; but these reflections are now as 
useless as they are sad. On the night of the 11th, Bennigsen, 
crossing the Alle, began his retreat from Heilsberg, which, 
with little intermission, he continued until he arrived on the  
evening of the 13th opposite Friedland. There he found a few squadrons of the enemy, who were driven across the river 
without much difficulty. He himself followed, and took up his 
quarters that night in the town, in front of which is a plain 
flanked by a wood; detaching a few regiments just before 
Friedland, to secure the safety of his quarters.  
 
 
 
THE BATTLE  OF FRIEDLAND .  
"At between three and four in the morni ng, the enemy, 
masked and covered by the wood, began his attack on the right 
wing, supported by troops that carne by degrees from the other 
side of the river; over which there was but one bridge and two 
pontoons. Notwithstanding these disadvantages, the Ru ssians 
each time successfully repulsed the attacks of the French, both 
on their right and centre, with great loss to the enemy —with 
the one exception of a battery, carried in the first instance but 
immediately retaken —until seven in the evening, when 
Bonap arte came up with ten thousand fresh troops against their 
left. This decided the fate of the day. The Russians, worn out, 
as well by their late hard marchings and want of food, as by 
the fourteen hours of incessant fighting they had sustained, 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  79 could not ma ke a stand against this new shock, and in less than 
an hour began a very disorderly retreat. The general confusion 
was increased by the difficulty of recrossing the Alle, and the 
necessity of again passing through the town, which was on fire 
in several par ts from the enemy's shells. Numbers were 
drowned in fording the river; being hardly pressed by the 
French.  
"The extent of our losses both in men and cannon 
should be attributed to these circumstances rather than to any 
decided superiority of the French in  the field. Their effect, too, 
on the troops, who had fought and had borne up so bravely 
through the day, was discouragement and dismay, and 
converted what might still have been, under abler leadership, a 
well-conducted retreat into a disorderly rout and p recipitated 
flight.  
"The Russian officers were unanimous in their 
reprobation of Bennigsen, who has betrayed the army, they 
say, if not by downright treachery, at least by the grossest 
ignorance and utter want of energy. 'If he is not removed,' says 
every  military man, even the warmest of the war party, 'we had 
better make peace to -morrow; for to attempt to fight a battle 
with him as their leader is only to sacrifice the lives of brave 
men without any possible chance of success.' . . . The French 
entered T ilsit yesterday afternoon, and commenced firing at 
the Russians across the river. The fate of Europe is probably 
decided."  
The immediate effects of the battle of Friedland was 
the capitulation on the 15th June of Konigsberg, which had 
been admirably defen ded by the Prussian general L'Estocq, 
and an armistice between the French and Russians, in which 
Prussia was graciously allowed to share several days later 
when Napoleon and Alexander had talked over the matter 
together. Their meeting -place was a raft in t he river Niemen, 
where they remained for nearly an hour alone, the conference 
being extended two hours longer on the admittance of the 
Grand Duke Constantine, Bennigsen, and Kalkreuth. King Frederick William, who had left Konigsberg for Memel a short 
time before the fall of the former town, had to content himself 
with riding up and down the shore in the rain. A more 
humiliating position for a successor to the throne of the hero of 
the Seven Years' 'Par, who never received an insult tamely, is 
difficult to c onceive. Napoleon despised the weak monarch, 
and by his subsequent conduct showed that he had no better 
liking for the beautiful Queen Louisa. On the following day 
the King was admitted to the Council, but when the fate of 
Europe was under discussion the t wo Emperors repaired to 
their raft alone.  
Napoleon paid delicate attentions to the Autocrat of all 
the Russias. He walked about with him arm in arm, and 
reviewed his troops before him, a compliment which 
Alexander duly returned.  
Meneval, one of Napoleon' s secretaries, who was 
present at Tilsit, affords us an interesting little glimpse of the 
two monarchs as they fraternized. "So intimate did the two 
Emperors become," he says, "that, when on returning from 
their excursions the Czar was to dine with Napoleo n, the latter 
would not allow him to go home to change his dress. He used 
to send somebody to the house where Alexander lived to fetch 
the things he needed. He used to send him his own cravats and 
handkerchief through his valet. He placed his big gold 
travelling bag at his disposal, and as Alexander had praised the 
carvings of the various fittings, and the way in which the bag 
was arranged, Napoleon made him a present of it before they 
separated. When they returned before the dinner hour it was 
for the sake  of a free tete-a-tete. On such occasions they used 
to leave the King of Prussia, and go into a little gallery which 
adjoined the Emperor's workroom. Sometimes Napoleon 
would bring the Czar into his study and ask for his maps, 
which included one of Turkey in Europe: I have seen them 
bending over this map and then continuing their conversation 
as they walked up and down. Schemes of partition were 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  80 occupying them. Constantinople was the only point on which 
they were not visibly agreed."  
It seemed like a case of love at first sight, but the 
wooer sought more than peace and goodwill; he aimed at a 
definite alliance with Russia. This he achieved, and although 
the Czar is to be blamed for having broken faith with Great 
Britain and Austria so speedily, much must be  forgiven him if 
only because both Powers had done little more than applaud 
the performer in the great war drama which had just ended. 
Prussia, as might be expected, came off very badly in the final 
settlement. Silesia and the provinces on the right bank o f the 
Elbe were given back to her; those on the left bank, with the 
Duchy of Brunswick and the Electorate of Hesse -Cassel were 
formed into the Kingdom of Westphalia and handed over to 
Jerome Bonaparte; nearly the whole of Prussian Poland was 
added to the p ossessions of the King of Saxony, and became 
the Grand Duchy of Warsaw. The remaining province, that of 
Bialystok, was added to the Czar's territory. The war which 
had been proceeding between Russia and Turkey was to end, 
Russia withdrawing from the Sultan 's Danubian Provinces. 
French troops were no longer to be quartered in Prussia.  
These are the chief clauses of the famous Peace of 
Tilsit, signed between France and Russia on the 7th July 1807, 
and between France and Prussia two days later. A secret treat y 
was also assented to by Alexander and Napoleon, who not 
only agreed to join their armies in mutual support should 
either of them decide to make war on any European Power, 
but mapped out the Eastern Hemisphere as future spoil, 
Napoleon's particular plunde r being Egypt and the coasts of 
the Adriatic Sea, which would be extremely useful in French 
designs against England. The reigning Kings of Spain and 
Portugal were to be deposed for the special benefit of the 
Bonaparte family. The Czar also promised that if  peace were 
not made with Great Britain, whereby she recognised the 
equality of all nations on the ocean highway and handed back 
the conquests made by her since the year of Trafalgar, Russia and France would together renew the war against England. In 
that event Denmark, Sweden, Austria and Portugal would also 
be compelled to join the allies and close their ports against 
British ships. If the great Sea Power consented to the 
arrangements so thoughtfully made on her behalf, Hanover 
was to be given back to Geo rge III. England successfully 
disposed of, the complete domination of the Eastern 
Hemisphere might come within the range of practical politics.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  81 CHAPTER XXI 
NAPOLEON 'S COMMERCIAL WAR WITH GREAT 
BRITAIN  
(1807)  
From the terms of the secret understanding bet ween 
Napoleon and Alexander at Tilsit, it is obvious that the former 
had made up his mind to stand or fall in a last desperate 
encounter with Great Britain. Secure in her island home, that 
Power alone had been successful in thwarting Napoleon. Her 
ships an d her money were constant menaces to the 
accomplishment of his over -lordship of the Continent. 
England's wooden walls barricaded the principal harbours; by 
her gold she largely helped to provide the sinews of war which 
enabled her allies to resist the oppr essor. To make war on the 
sea, to drive it home to the coasts of the enemy, was not 
possible in the shattered condition of the French marine.  
How then was her downfall to be brought about? 
Before his war with Prussia, Napoleon had taken a preliminary 
step by compelling Frederick William III. to forbid British 
vessels the use of the ports of his Kingdom and of Hanover. 
On the 21st November 1806 he augmented his plan by the 
stringent regulations of the Berlin Decree, so called because it 
was issued from that  city. His powerful rival was to be cut off 
from all further intercourse with Europe. No letters were to 
pass, all commerce was to cease, every British subject in 
France or any country allied to her, or occupied by French 
troops, was liable to be declared a prisoner of war.  
In theory the United Kingdom was in a state of 
blockade. By excluding her goods, the sale of which amounted 
to an enormous sum every year, from the countries of his allies 
and those directly under his control, Napoleon hoped that she would be forced to give up the unequal contest. Great Britain 
had retaliated speedily and effectually upon Prussia by seizing 
several hundred of her ships then lying in British harbours, by 
blockading her coasts, and by declaring war. She met the 
Berlin Decr ee by turning the tables on France, proclaiming 
France and her allies to be in a state of blockade, and 
providing that any ship which had not set out from, or touched 
at, a British harbour should be considered a lawful prize. 
Napoleon retorted by his Milan  Decree of the 7th December 
1807, whereby ships that had issued from or touched at British 
ports were put at the mercy of the French privateers which 
scoured the seas; "all ships going to or coming from any 
harbour in Great Britain or her colonies, or any country 
occupied by British troops, should be made a prize."  
The banning of British goods and the fostering of home 
manufactures were the main planks of the great Continental 
System. Started with the ostensible purpose of ruining Great 
Britain, it contrib uted largely to Napoleon's downfall. In order 
to make Europe self -contained it was necessary to add 
conquest to conquest, and an interminable war does not 
contribute to happiness or make for prosperity. Eventually the 
French themselves lost their zest for strife, and the real 
meaning of nationality began to make itself felt in countries 
whose inhabitants groaned under the intolerable burden of a 
foreign taskmaster. The System, which Bourrienne calls "an 
act of tyranny and madness" which was "worthy only of the 
dark and barbarous ages," was applied to France, Italy, 
Switzerland, Holland, Austria, Russia, Prussia, the Rhenish 
Confederation, Denmark, Spain and Portugal. If you glance at 
the map of Europe you will see that there were few States to 
which the Napo leonic rule in some way or other did not apply. 
The people who benefited chiefly by this cutting off of 
England were the smugglers, who plied a magnificent trade 
both on sea and land. Thousands of persons were engaged in 
the business of contraband, conveyi ng goods into French 
territories and assisting the sending of Continental productions 
to Great Britain. The cost of many articles went up to an 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  82 extravagant figure. For instance, in France cotton stockings 
ranged from six shillings to seven shillings per pa ir; sugar 
varied from five shillings to six shillings per pound, while the 
same quantity of coffee sold at from ten shillings to eleven 
shillings. When we compare the last commodity with the price 
which obtained in England the difference is astounding. In 
1812 coffee could be purchased in Liverpool for one -fifteenth 
of the price paid in Paris.  
"Take especial care," the Emperor wrote to Junot, "that 
the ladies of your establishment use Swiss tea. It is as good as 
that of China. Coffee made from chicory is n ot at all inferior to 
that of Arabia. Let them make use of these substitutes in their 
drawing -rooms, instead of amusing themselves with talking 
politics like Madame de Stael. Let them take care, also, that no 
part of their dress is made of English merchand ise. If the 
wives of my chief officers do not set the example, whom can I 
expect to follow it? It is a contest of life or death between 
France and England. I must look for the most cordial support 
in all those by whom I am surrounded."  
Napoleon's tariff r eform, instead of materially 
benefiting the manufacturers, tended to decrease the 
consumption of raw materials, because they could not be 
obtained. When uniforms were required for the French troops 
in the Eylau campaign they had to be purchased in England!  
Gradually the barriers began to break down, and by the sale of 
licenses for the bringing in of hitherto forbidden goods with 
the proviso that French manufactured goods must be taken in 
exchange, Napoleon replenished his war chests preparatory to 
the next campaign. It was the Czar's abandonment of the 
Continental System which led to the Emperor's disastrous 
Russian campaign. After that mammoth catastrophe, the whole 
scheme gradually fell to pieces, but not before all concerned, 
including Great Britain, had suffered very considerably.  
On the Emperor's return to Paris from Tilsit in July 
1807, he gave his attention for a short time to home affairs. He 
had been away for ten months, and the keenest enthusiasm for him was shown on all sides. The Great Nation was  indeed 
worthy of the name which had been given to the French long 
before Napoleon and his armies had proved their right to it, 
and his subjects shared in the glamour of victory if not in the 
spoil. They furnished him with troops, were the props which 
supp orted his throne, and if they gave their sons to be victims 
of war they did not show on festive occasions that they 
regarded this as aught but a cruel necessity. The French love 
glory above everything, and to have a son serving with the 
eagles was a matter  of pride to every true Frenchman.  
Chancellor Pasquier attended the Te Deum   to celebrate 
Napoleon's triumphs which was sung at the cathedral of Notre 
Dame, and he tells us in his Memoirs   that he sat almost 
opposite the throne; from which point of vantag e he studied 
the Emperor's face with quiet persistency. "He was obviously 
pleased with the religious sanction," the judge relates, "which, 
in the eyes of the people, consecrated his glory and 
omnipotence; he set a price on it, all the greater from the fact  
that up to the time of his coming it had been absolutely denied 
to all the works of the Revolution, and that it distinguished 
him from all that had preceded him.  
"I am of opinion," adds the same authority, "that at no 
moment of his career did he enjoy mo re completely, or at least 
with more apparent security, the favours of fortune. Generally, 
in the midst of his greatest successes, he affected an anxious 
air, as if he wished it to be understood that his great designs 
were not yet accomplished, and that pe ople ought not to think 
that there remained nothing more to do. The observation 
which I here record has been repeatedly made by those who 
have come into close contact with him, and who never found 
him less approachable than at times when it was reasonable to 
suppose that some most fortunate happening would open his 
soul to the sentiments of a more expansive good nature.  
"Generally speaking, it was better for one having a 
favour to ask of him to approach him in his moments of worry, 
rather than on the days of his most brilliant successes. His 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  83 character did not err on the generous side. I think I see him 
still, as he was on that day, dressed in his State costume, 
which, though a little theatrical, was noble and fine. His 
features, always calm and serious, rec alled the cameos which 
represent the Roman Emperors. He was small; still his whole 
person, in this imposing ceremony, was in harmony with the 
part he was playing. A sword glittering with precious stones 
was at his side, and the famous diamond called the Regent  
formed its pommel. Its brilliancy did not let us forget that this 
sword was the sharpest and most victorious that the world had 
seen since those of Alexander and Caesar. I remember that M. 
Beugnot, who sat by me, gave utterance to this thought. Both 
of us were then far from dreaming that less than seven years 
would suffice to break it."  
The following is an instance in support of Pasquier's 
statement regarding favours. When the Emperor was deeply 
engrossed in the Austrian campaign of 1809, one of his 
servants, named Fischer, went out of his mind. His master 
refused to fill his post, and paid the poor fellow, who had to be 
put in an asylum, his full salary of 12,000 francs a year until 
the end of 1812, when Napoleon gave him an annual pension 
of 6000 fr ancs. Such kindness on the part of the man who 
might well be pardoned for forgetting or overlooking some 
claim, real or fancied, on his goodwill was not rare but 
common.  
Napoleon soon settled down to work, forsaking the 
hubbub of war for the quietness of the study. He established 
the University of France, which included every school both 
large and small, the primary object being to train the children 
in patriotism. In a word, he sought to dominate the mind. 
"There will never be fixity in politics," the Emp eror averred, 
"if there is not a teaching body with fixed principles. As long 
as people do not from their infancy learn whether they ought 
to be republicans or monarchists, Catholics or sceptics, the 
State will never form a nation: it will rest on unsafe a nd 
shifting foundations, always exposed to changes and disorders." The first effort of the Council of the University was 
to compile the "Imperial Catechism," one of the articles of the 
Napoleonic faith being that "Christians owe to the princes who 
govern t hem, and we in particular owe to Napoleon I., our 
Emperor, love, respect, obedience, fidelity, military service, 
and the taxes levied for the preservation and defence of the 
Empire and of his throne. We also owe him fervent prayers for 
his safety and for t he spiritual and temporal prosperity of the 
State."  
The founder took the greatest possible interest in the 
work of the University, delighting to pay surprise visits to the 
schools. On one occasion he was somewhat nonplussed by a 
girl of whom he had asked the question: "How many 
needlesful of thread does it take to make a shirt?" "Sire," she 
replied, "I should need but one, if I could have that sufficiently 
long." The Emperor gave the witty scholar a gold chain as a 
reward.  
It was not fated, however, that the arts of peace should 
for long occupy first place in the attention either of Napoleon 
or his people, and soon the country was again engrossed in 
rumours of war. British agents had not been asleep on the 
Continent, indeed, on the 15th July 1807, less tha n a week 
after the signature of peace between France and Prussia, 
Jackson confided to his Diary   that he had "been positively 
assured that Bonaparte has sent eventual orders to Denmark to 
shut the Sound against us." A secret article of the Tilsit treaty 
was to the effect that should Sweden refuse to close her ports 
to England and to declare war against her, Denmark should be 
compelled to fight the former. This was to take effect if the 
negotiations for peace between Great Britain and Russia 
failed, but rece nt research shows that Canning, our Foreign 
Minister, was not correctly informed on this matter, and 
believed that the arrangement was to take effect immediately. 
England determined not to be forestalled, and proposed that 
Denmark should hand over her flee t until a general peace was 
proclaimed. The Prince Royal positively refused to entertain 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  84 the proposition. As a land expedition was contemplated by 
Great Britain thousands of peasants were enlisted to defend 
Copenhagen, the garrison there consisting of some  4000 troops 
ill-provided with artillery. An army of 27,000 strong under 
Lord Cathcart sailed from Yarmouth in a fleet commanded by 
Admiral Gambier and disembarked on the morning of the 16th 
August some ten miles north of the Danish Capital. Batteries 
were  erected, but little actual progress was made until Arthur 
Wellesley, who had recently returned from India, attacked a 
corps of 4000 of the militia at Kioge, 900 of whom were killed 
or wounded, and 1500 taken prisoners. Jackson's description 
of them is any thing but picturesque. "The men are on board 
prison ships," he writes, "and miserable wretches they are, fit 
for nothing but following the plough. They wear red and green 
striped woollen jackets, and wooden sabots. Their long lank 
hair hangs over their sho ulders, and gives to their rugged 
features a wild expression. The knowing ones say that after the 
first fire they threw away their arms, hoping, without them, to 
escape the pursuit of our troops. In fact, the battle was not a 
very glorious one, but this yo u will keep for yourself. . . . The 
Danes have not yet been put to any severe trial; but they show 
symptoms of a resolute spirit, and seem determined to fight it 
out with us. They have already burnt their suburbs and 
destroyed every house that was likely t o afford shelter to our 
people."  
The bombardment of the capital began on the 2nd 
September, 1807, and ended on the 5th, when the British took 
possession of the citadel and arsenals. The Danish fleet was 
surrounded and convoyed to England the following mon th. 
Jackson thus describes the contest, beginning with the 
preliminary passage from Landscrona to the fleet off 
Copenhagen, which occupied two hours and a half.  
"It was nearly dark when we sailed out of the harbour; 
and in about half an hour afterwards we  saw a great many 
rockets in the air, succeeded by shells on either side. The wind 
was so violent that we heard nothing until we were actually in the midst of the fleet, though we saw everything distinctly. 
Several shells fell in our direction, and so frig htened our 
boatmen, that they repeatedly urged us to turn back. This, of 
course, we would not hear of; and at last we succeeded in 
getting alongside the flagship, where we found the Admiral 
and my brother in the stern gallery looking at the 
conflagration —for the city was on fire in three places. I never 
saw, nor can well conceive, a more awful, yet magnificent 
spectacle. It was the beginning of the bombardment in forma . 
We saw and heard it going on until daylight, as we lay in our 
cots; and as the work of d estruction proceeded, I cannot 
describe to you the appalling effect it had on me. Our cabin 
was illuminated with an intensely red glow, then suddenly 
wrapped in deep gloom, as the flames rose and fell, while the 
vessel quivered and every plank in her was s haken by the loud 
reverberation of the cannon. Alas! poor Danes! I could not but 
feel for them.  
"Lord Cathcart told me the next morning that he had 
thrown two thousand shells into the town, besides the fire from 
our gun -boats and the famous catamaran rock ets. And this sort 
of work was to begin again at night. . . .  
"In the afternoon the firing began again with greater 
fury than ever, and for two or three hours there was a 
tremendous blaze. The wind was high; the flames spread 
rapidly, and towards night vi vidly illumined the horizon, so 
that at the distance of five miles from the city we could see 
each other on the quarterdeck as if it had been broad daylight, 
and into the city in the same manner; the intervening ships 
forming very picturesque objects.  
". . . Ere I left, the fire had increased to a prodigious 
height, the principal church was in flames, looking like a 
pyramid of fire, and the last I saw and heard of the ill -fated 
city was the falling -in of the steeple with a tremendous crash, 
and the distant  loud hurrahs it occasioned along our line.  
"I own that my heart ached as I thought of the many 
scenes of horror that must inevitably take place in the midst of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  85 all this—and soon there would be but a heap of ruins instead 
of a city to take."  
Few people w ere surprised when Denmark definitely 
allied herself to France and declared war against Great Britain, 
as did Russia, after some show of negotiations, in November. 
In the following spring war was declared upon Sweden by the 
Czar without any just cause. Fin land was overrun by his 
troops, but the resistance of the brave inhabitants led to an Act 
of Guarantee whereby the Czar promised to uphold the old 
laws. Still eager to share in the dismemberment of the Turkish 
Empire, Alexander clung to the Danubian provin ces of 
Moldavia and Wallachia which were to have been restored to 
the Sultan by the terms of the Treaty of Tilsit, and Napoleon, 
on his part, continued to keep Prussia full of French soldiers. 
Thus both parties were unfaithful to their most solemn 
promises , but this did not preclude a joint expedition to India 
to be undertaken by France, Russia, and Austria from being 
mooted.  
Napoleon now took occasion to visit Italy, with the 
usual results. Etruria, whose king was a grandson of Charles 
IV. of Spain, becam e a department of France, the young 
monarch being promised a province in Portugal with the title 
of King of Northern Lusitania, and the Papal States were filled 
with French troops and shortly afterwards absorbed in the 
kingdom of Italy.  CHAPTER XXII  
THE GENESIS OF THE PENINSULAR WAR 
(1808)  
Although the crown of Spain was not yet worn by a 
nominee of Napoleon its present holder, or rather Manuel 
Godoy, an adventurer who in five years had risen from private 
in the Guards to chief Minister, was careful not t o offend the 
Emperor. Portugal, on the other hand, was a friend of England, 
with whom she did a very large trade. Unfortunately her 
means of resistance were so weak and unorganized that when 
the Emperor of the French called upon the Prince Regent to 
close the harbours to British ships and declare war against 
England he had no alternative but to obey. A constant menace 
in the form of 28,000 troops had been stationed at Bayonne, 
and did not admit of argument. This Army of the Gironde was 
composed for the most  part of young and inexperienced 
conscripts, but they were French, and therefore held to be 
invincible. The confiscation of British property was also 
demanded by Napoleon, but on this point the Prince Regent 
temporized, thus giving the majority of the Brit ish residents 
time to leave the country, to the wrath of the Emperor. 
Sufficient of the story of Napoleon has been told to show that 
he was no believer in half measures; when a State hesitated to 
do his will, swift retribution usually followed. Orders were  
immediately issued for Junot to proceed to Spain, where he 
would be joined by troops of that nationality, and enter 
Portugal. On the other side of the French frontiers the march 
was only accomplished with much difficulty, the trackless 
mountains, swollen rivers, and almost incessant rain making 
progress extremely slow and hazardous.  
Stricken with panic, the Queen, the Regent, the Royal 
Family, the Court and many members of the nobility sailed for 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  86 Brazil under the protection of a British fleet commanded by  
Sir Sidney Smith, the brilliant young officer who had already 
crossed Napoleon's path in Syria. So great was the fear of the 
French that no fewer than fourteen cartloads of plate were left 
on the quay at Belem. But for the impassable state of the river 
Zezere, which prevented Junot from making rapid progress, 
the royal fugitives would have been prevented from escaping 
to Rio Janeiro.  
Lisbon was occupied by Junot's ragged regiments 
without much trouble. A strong resistance could scarcely have 
been expected , seeing what a poor example had been given to 
the people by those who ruled them. For a time it appeared as 
if everything connected with the French occupation would be 
settled satisfactorily. The proclamation issued by Junot, now 
Duke of Abrantes and Gove rnor of Portugal, on the 1st 
February 1808, made no secret of Napoleon's intentions.  
"The House of Braganza," it runs, "has ceased to reign 
in Portugal; and the Emperor Napoleon, having taken under 
his protection the beautiful kingdom of Portugal, wishes that it 
should be administered and governed over its whole extent in 
the name of his Majesty, and by the General -in-Chief of his 
army."  
This must have been bitter reading to Godoy. In a 
secret treaty signed at Fontainebleau on the 27th October 
1807, he ha d been promised the southern Portuguese provinces 
of Alemtejo and Algarve as a Principality for his connivance 
and assistance in the downfall of Portugal. Napoleon was 
paying him back in his own coin. During the Prussian 
campaign Godoy had cherished hostil e designs against France, 
hoping for the co -operation of either England or Russia. In a 
proclamation dated the 5th October 1806, he had summoned 
the Portuguese nation to arms and but thinly disguised the 
name of the prospective enemy. The brilliant field o f Jena, 
however, so radically changed the political aspect that it was 
necessary to make other plans, and Godoy put forth every 
effort possible to placate Napoleon. The Emperor had not forgotten, however; he never did, and he returned evil for evil. 
Having  had the assistance of Spanish troops and the use of 
Spanish territory for the passage of his own soldiers, the 
Emperor found it inconvenient to complete his part of the 
bargain, and so the Prince of the Peace, to give Godoy his 
official title, went empty away.  
Things were far from well with the Royal house of 
Spain. Charles IV. and his son Ferdinand, Prince of the 
Asturias, had quarrelled, the King going so far as to have his 
heir arrested on the charge of plotting against the throne. The 
main cause of di sagreement was the Prince's detestation of 
Godoy, who at every turn came between him and his father, 
and might conceivably rob him of his succession to the throne. 
Napoleon, ever eager and willing to make an advantage out of 
another's disadvantage, surmise d that the quarrel would enable 
him to settle the affairs of the eastern portion of the Peninsula 
to his liking. Hence another army of 25,000) ?> men was 
concentrated at Bayonne which, without warning, crossed into 
Spanish territory towards the end of Nove mber 1807. Further 
corps followed until more than 100,000 French soldiers had 
traversed the Pyrenees. Citadels and fortresses were seized, 
often by bribery or cunning, that of Pampeluna by over -
eagerness on the part of the garrison to secure the French 
soldiers as contestants in a snowball -fight. The opportunity 
was not allowed to slip, and while the Spaniards were off their 
guard the new arrivals took possession of the fort, and 
remained there till 1813.  
The nation correctly associated Godoy with the 
indignities it was suffering. His palace at Aranjuez was 
sacked, and the Favourite was fortunate in not being lynched 
by the mob. Finally the King abdicated in favour of his son, an 
act which caused more rejoicing than had been accorded any 
other event during his reign.  
Murat and his troops entered Madrid the day previous 
to the state entry of the young monarch. Little interest was 
shown in the arrival of the French soldiers, but Ferdinand 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  87 received an astounding ovation, women in their enthusiasm 
scattering fl owers before him as he rode. Forty -eight hours 
after the event Napoleon offered the Crown of Spain to his 
brother Louis, King of Holland.  
On one pretext and another Ferdinand, whom 
Napoleon called "the enemy of France," was persuaded to 
meet the Emperor a t Bayonne. During the interview he was 
informed that he could have the choice of two evils. If he 
would resign his throne the Emperor would give him Etruria 
as some kind of compensation, if not he would be deposed. To 
complicate the difficulty, Charles IV. , at Napoleon's 
instigation, withdrew his abdication, which he declared had 
been wrung from him by fear, and did everything in his power 
to induce his son to accept Napoleon's offer. At last the 
Emperor lost patience, and Ferdinand was given a few hours to  
make up his mind whether he would submit or be tried for 
high treason. Accordingly, on the 6th May 1808, the King, 
who had reigned less than two months, surrendered his throne, 
as he believed, to its former occupant, totally unaware that 
Napoleon had exac ted the resignation of Charles IV. on the 
previous day. Few more despicable acts are recorded in 
history, certainly no better example could be found of 
Napoleon's lack of a sense of honour in political matters.  
Spain was now at the Emperor's disposal. Lou is had 
refused the kingdom, and so it was handed over to Joseph, 
Naples being given to Murat, his brother -in-law. The Emperor 
lived to repent the day, as did Joseph, who had endeared 
himself to the Neapolitans but could never persuade his 
Spanish subjects that he was anything but a vulgar upstart 
trading on the reputation of his brilliant brother.  
Baptiste Capefigue, the eminent French historian, has 
tersely summed up the cause of Napoleon's ultimate failure, 
and the passages quoted here have special refer ence to the 
events we are now studying. "Napoleon," he says, "did not fail 
through the governments opposed to him, but through the 
people; it was when he attack( d national feelings that he met with a stubborn resistance; he had strangely abused his 
dictat orial power over Europe; he crushed down nations by his 
treaties, and he gave up the populations to kings of his own 
creation; he broke territories into fractions, separating that 
which was before united, and joining together those parts 
which were separat ed; he transformed a republic into a 
kingdom; of a free town he made a district of one of his 
prefectships; he united the high lands to the plain; simple, 
primitive populations to old and corrupt ones, without regard 
to diversities of language, or manners,  or to religious 
antipathies. In Germany, above all, his policy appears most 
tyrannical; he takes away a province from one monarchy and 
gives it to another; he plays with the masses as if they were 
chessmen; he creates a kingdom of Westphalia out of more 
than twenty States or fragments of States; he detaches Tyrol 
from Austria, heedless of traditional customs, institutions, and 
manners; Holland, a mercantile republic, he changes into a 
kingdom; to Naples, at the extremity of Italy, he sends one of 
his broth ers. His is an unparalleled despotism, without reason 
or excuse. The people are for him like a mute herd of cattle; he 
pens them up, or drives them before him with his terrible 
sword. Add to this the French spirit, the French character, 
which, in his pride  of a founder of a great empire, he wished to 
force upon all Europe, together with his own code of laws. 
God has imparted to each of the various nations a character 
which is its own; for good or for evil, it is unwise to run 
counter to it. Germany has its own morals and manners; Spain 
has its inveterate habits —perhaps they dispose to indolence —
but what is that to strangers? Uniformity may be a plausible 
idea in mathematics; but in the moral organization of the 
human kind, harmony is the result of diversitie s."  
What is probably a typical summing up of the case 
from the distinctly British point of view is afforded us in a 
letter written by Francis Horner on the 13th June 1808, in 
which he says: "I cannot but rejoice that a people who bear 
such a name as the S paniards should make a struggle at least 
for their independence; the example cannot be otherwise than 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  88 beneficial, even if they should entirely fail, to their posterity at 
some future day, and to all the rest of mankind. It is the most 
detestable of all the  enormities into which Bonaparte's love of 
dominion has plunged him, and more completely devoid than 
any other of all the pretence of provocation or security. If I 
were a Spaniard, I should consider resistance, however 
desperate in its chances of success, and however bloody in its 
immediate operation, as an indispensable duty of discretion 
and expediency; to put the proposition in its most frigid form 
of expression. . . . What a moment for a Spaniard of political 
and military genius  
Pending the arrival of the new monarch, Murat was 
assigned the important post of Lieutenant -General of the 
kingdom. He was a good cavalry leader beyond question, but 
as a statesman he did not shine during the period in which he 
was dictator of Spain. He let it be seen that he re garded the 
nation as already conquered, and it is not surprising that his 
tactless rule should have roused bitter resentment. On the 2nd 
May there was a riot in Madrid, short and furious, but 
indicating the passionate nature of the citizens. Eight hundred 
insurgents fell in the streets, perhaps half that number of 
soldiers were laid low, and two hundred Spaniards were 
afterwards shot by Murat's orders for having taken part in the 
rebellion. Many of the populace had been armed with sticks 
and stones only, ot hers with muskets which they used to good 
effect, both in the squares and from the housetops. It was only 
when additional soldiers, including the Mamelukes, the 
chasseurs, and dragoons, were brought up that the crowd 
realised the hopelessness of the task t hey had undertaken. If 
"the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church," the blood 
of those who fell in Madrid on that May day in 1808 was the 
seed from which the harvest of disaster for Napoleonic 
statesman -ship was reaped. The despot did not realise the 
possibility at first, but at St Helena, when frankness was not 
always a despised virtue, he told Las Cases that the Spanish 
war "was the first cause of the calamities of France." The self -
confidence of Murat, who said, "My victory over the insurgents i n the capital assures us the peaceable possession of 
Spain," a sentiment in which the Emperor agreed, was speedily 
dispelled. "Bah!" exclaimed Napoleon when he was told by an 
eyewitness of the revolution at Madrid and the sullen courage 
of the people, "the y will calm down and will bless me as soon 
as they see their country freed from the discredit and disorder 
into which it has been thrown by the weakest and most corrupt 
administration that ever existed."  
While the officials in Madrid were bowing to Joseph , 
the people in the provinces were showing by open rebellion 
that they neither desired him as king nor wished for 
Napoleon's assistance in the ruling of their country. The priests 
told the people of the Emperor's ungenerous treatment of the 
Pope, how a Fre nch force had entered Rome in the previous 
February, and that his Holiness had lost almost every vestige 
of his civil power. Every little township began to take 
measures of offence and defence. Innumerable miniature 
armies roamed among the mountains like b andits, awaiting an 
opportunity to annihilate a French outpost, to interrupt 
communications, or to fall on a division as it marched along to 
join one of the army corps now being poured into Spain. 
General actions were not encouraged, and usually ended in 
disaster. Assassinations and massacres became the order of the 
day on both sides, forcing the French commanders to realise 
that they had to face a novel kind of warfare —a nation in 
arms. At the end of May 1808, when the people were actively 
organizing, ther e were nearly 120,000 French troops in Spain 
and Portugal. In the first few engagements the Spaniards, who 
possibly numbered 100,000, including the regulars, were 
routed. When towns were besieged the French met with less 
success, and the defence of Saragos sa under young Joseph 
Palafox, whose daring soon raised him to the dignity of a 
national hero, is a most thrilling episode. A name which must 
be coupled with his is that of Augustina (or Manuela) Sanchez. 
A battery had been abandoned by the Spaniards, and this brave 
girl, one of the many inhabitants who helped to defend their 
city, found that the hand of a dead gunner still grasped a 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  89 lighted match, whereupon she seized it and fired the gun, 
thereby attracting the attention of the fugitives, who returned 
to the fight. The first siege of Saragossa lasted for nearly eight 
weeks, but the place eventually surrendered to Lannes.  
Duhesme and his French soldiers met with even worse 
fortune, being forced to take refuge in Barcelona, where the 
Spaniards kept them sec ure for nearly four months. At Medina 
de Rio Seco the insurgents under La Cuesta and Blake, an 
Irishman, were completely routed by Bessieres. This event 
might have weakened the national cause very considerably had 
not Dupont's army been entrapped among the  Sierra Morena 
mountains by Castanos. In the fighting that took place 3,000 
French were either killed or wounded, and 18,000 troops were 
forced to lay down their arms at the subsequent capitulation of 
Baylen. When Napoleon heard of the victory at Medina de  Rio 
Seco, he wrote: "Bessieres has put the crown on Joseph's head. 
The Spaniards have now perhaps 15,000 men left, with some 
old blockhead at their head; the resistance of the Peninsula is 
ended!" His reception of the news of Dupont's surrender was 
very d ifferent. "That an army should be beaten is nothing," he 
burst forth after reading the fatal despatch, "it is the daily fate 
of war, and is easily repaired, but that an army should submit 
to a dishonourable capitulation is a stain on the glory of our 
arms which can never be effaced. Wounds inflicted on honour 
are incurable. The moral effect of this catastrophe will be 
terrible." The luckless Dupont was promptly imprisoned on his 
return to France, and remained so until 1814.  
This trouble did not come singly . It was followed 
shortly afterwards by the news that Joseph, feeling that Madrid 
was no longer secure, had deemed it advisable to retire in 
haste to Burgos, behind the Ebro, and within comparatively 
easy distance of the frontier. Some three weeks later Ca staflos 
at the head of his troops marched into the capital. The position 
of Ferdinand's successor was speedily becoming untenable. "I 
have not a single Spaniard left who is attached to my cause," 
he tells his brother. "As a General, my part would be endura ble—nay, easy; for, with a detachment of your veteran 
troops, I could conquer the Spaniards, but as a King my 
position is insupportable, for I must kill one portion of my 
subjects to make the other submit. I decline, therefore, to reign 
over a people who w ill not have me." He adds that he does not 
wish to retire conquered, but pleads for an experienced army 
that he may return to Madrid and come to terms with his 
rebellious subjects ere seeking the quiet of Naples.  
In Portugal Junot, by dint of extreme seve rity, had 
succeeded in disarming the populace and securing the 
principal fortresses, his troops being dispersed about the 
country. His success made him feel so self -satisfied that he 
entertained the hope that Napoleon would confer the crown of 
Portugal upo n him. As a preliminary step he endeavoured to 
win over the nobles and clergy. The Emperor had different 
views, and while recognising Junot's unquestionable ability he 
was not blind to his shortcomings.  
At the same time as King Joseph was retreating from 
Madrid, 9000 British soldiers under Sir Arthur Wellesley had 
reached the mouth of the Mondego River, and, in spite of 
many difficulties, had effected a landing. The future Duke of 
Wellington was not to retain supreme command, although he 
had started out wi th that expectation. After leaving England he 
learned that three other officers, namely, Sir Hew Dalrymple, 
then Governor of Gibraltar; Sir Harry Burrard, a Guardsman 
of some experience; and Sir John Moore, who had previously 
taken part in Paoli's descent on Corsica and seen much 
honourable service in the West Indies and Ireland, were to join 
the expedition. Wellesley was not pleased at being superseded, 
but he was too good a soldier to show resentment. "Whether I 
am to command the army or not," he told the  home authorities, 
"or am to quit it, I shall do my best to secure its success, and 
you may depend upon it that I shall not hurry the operations or 
commence them one moment sooner than they ought to be 
commenced, in order that I may reap the credit of succ ess." 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  90 Nothing that he ever wrote or said reveals more truly the 
unswerving honour and loyalty of the Iron Duke.  
Junot was not particularly perturbed by the news of 
Wellesley's arrival. Small British expeditionary forces had 
landed again and again in vario us parts of the continent since 
1793, and usually had been only too glad to return to England. 
The French commander noted with pleasure that the 
Portuguese showed little sympathy with their allies, so much 
so that Sir Arthur had the utmost difficulty to pe rsuade them to 
lend assistance. Lisbon was still too disturbed to warrant Junot 
leaving it, and he accordingly directed Loison and Laborde to 
concentrate near Leiria. Wellesley, however, outmarched 
them, and prevented them from combining their forces 
immed iately. On the 15th August he had a smart skirmish with 
Laborde, and two days later was victorious at Roleia, where a 
stiff battle was fought with the same commander. 
Unfortunately Wellesley's forces were not sufficiently strong 
to make the victory decisiv e or to stop the two forces of the 
enemy from uniting later.  
Junot now found it necessary to assume personal 
command. Leaving Madrid with a garrison of 7000 soldiers, 
he gathered his available forces, including those of Loison and 
Laborde, and came up wit h the British at Vimiero on the 21st 
August. Wellesley's strength was some 18,000 troops in all, 
and although Sir Harry Burrard was the senior officer, he did 
not exercise his authority until the battle was almost 
concluded. In infantry Sir Arthur had the advantage, but Junot, 
while having but 13,000 men for the task he had undertaken, 
was considerably better off in cavalry. One incident in 
particular relieves the sordid story of the fight. In a charge 
made by the 71st and 92nd British regiments a piper, wh o was 
wounded in the thigh, fell to the ground. He continued to blow 
his pibroch, declaring that "the lads should nae want music to 
their wark." The day remained with the British, and had 
Wellesley been allowed to pursue the French, probably Lisbon 
would h ave fallen. It is said that when Wellesley heard Burrard's order to abstain from following the enemy, he 
remarked to his staff: "There is nothing left for us, gentlemen, 
but to hunt red -legged partridges!"  
On the suggestion of Junot an armistice was agree d 
upon. This ended in the ill -considered Convention of Cintra, 
signed on the 30th August 1808, whereby Portugal was 
relieved of 25,000 French invaders. The troops were conveyed 
back to France by British ships. Junot was disgraced in the 
eyes of the Emperor  and received no further command until 
the Russian campaign of 1812. His wife, when reviewing this 
campaign, says with justice, "Everything which was not a 
triumph he (Napoleon) regarded as a defeat." As no clause was 
inserted in the 'Convention to the eff ect that the troops should 
not serve again, it is not difficult to understand why a popular 
outcry was raised in Great Britain against the three generals. It 
soon became evident that Wellesley did not merit the attacks 
made upon Dalrymple, Burrard, and him self in the Press and 
elsewhere. An inquiry into the affair was instituted by 
command of George III., and its finding was favourable to the 
decision of the signatories of the Convention, but only 
Wellesley saw active service again. The command in Portugal 
was given to Sir John Moore, and meantime Sir Arthur took 
his seat in the House of Commons and resumed his work as 
Irish Secretary, little thinking that in a few months he would 
return to the South as Commander -in-Chief.  
A caricature by Woodward, publishe d in February 
1809, very ably sums up British opinion of the affair. It can be 
understood by the following humorous lines, in imitation of 
"The House that Jack Built: —  
These are the French who took the Gold that lay in the 
City of Lisbon.  
This is Sir Art hur (whose Valour and skill began so 
well but ended so ill) who beat the French who took the Gold 
that lay in the City of Lisbon.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  91 This is the Convention that Nobody owns, that saved 
old Junot's Baggage and Bones, altho' Sir Arthur (whose 
Valour and skill began so well but ended so ill,) had beaten the 
French who took the Gold that lay in the City of Lisbon.  
This is John Bull, in great dismay, at the sight of the 
Ships which carried away the gold and silver and all the spoil 
the French had plundered with s o much toil after the 
Convention which nobody owns, which saved old Junot's 
Baggage and Bones, altho' Sir Arthur (whose Valour and skill 
began so well but ended so ill) had beaten the French who 
took the Gold that lay in the City of Lisbon.  CHAPTER XXIII  
GLORY AT ERFURT AND HUMILIATION IN SPAIN 
(1808 -1809)  
The cloud of misfortune which overshadowed the 
French armies in Spain and Portugal gradually grew in size 
and density until it covered practically the whole of Europe. 
Encouraged by the success of the i nsurgents in the Iberian 
Peninsula and the triumph of British arms in Portugal, both 
Austria and Germany took courage and prepared to throw off 
the yoke. In Austria a landwehr , or local militia, designed to 
number 180,000 of the young men of the country, c ame into 
being; in Prussia patriotic clubs sprang up on all hands, while 
such able statesmen as Stein, who had been Minister of State 
for Trade, and Scharnhorst, a skilful officer and organizer, 
worked nobly in the interests of military reforms which were 
destined to bear much good fruit in due course.  
Napoleon was more immediately concerned with the 
intentions of the former Power. To a certain extent he had 
clipped the wings of the Prussian eagle by forcing the King 
into an undertaking that for the next t en years his army should 
not exceed 40,000 troops. This did not prevent many civilians 
being quietly drafted into a reserve for future service, or the 
formation of a school of thought with the highest patriotic 
ideals. The Emperor's policy was thoroughly s ound. By still 
holding the fortresses of Glogau, Stettin, and Kustrin, and 
reducing the number of national troops to a minimum, the 
French troops which had been kept in Prussia since the 
campaign of her humiliation were set free for service in the 
South. N apoleon already knew of Austria's warlike 
disposition, and was even a little uncertain as to Russia. 
Suspicion was mutual, and as he was about to set out for Spain 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  92 to take command of his troops, he thought it advisable to 
"sound" the temper of his ally per sonally.  
It was arranged that the Emperor and the Czar should 
meet at the little town of Erfurt towards the end of September 
1808. No fewer than seventy sovereigns and princes came to 
the meeting, including the Kings of Saxony, Bavaria, 
Wurtemberg, and We stphalia, the Grand Duke Constantine of 
Russia, Prince William of Prussia, the Dukes of Saxe -Weimar, 
Saxe -Gotha, and Holstein -Oldenburg, together with 
distinguished marshals and courtiers. There were reviews, 
plays in the theatre acted by the most talented  artists in 
France—Talma having been promised "a parterre full of 
kings"—and a stag -hunt on the battle -field of Jena. Costly 
presents were exchanged, one of the Czar's gifts being a 
magnificent Persian horse, silvery grey in colour, which 
Napoleon afterwar ds used by a strange coincidence in the 
battles of Vitebsk, Smolensk, and Borodino during the Russian 
campaign. The animal also accompanied him to Elba.  
This great diplomatic performance was magnificently 
staged. If less dramatic than Tilsit, it was no le ss important. 
The festivities and conferences between the Emperor and 
Alexander lasted seventeen days. They parted on the 14th 
October, the anniversary of the great fight which did so much 
to make Napoleon master of Prussia. The terms of the Peace of 
Tilsit had not been kept too scrupulously by either monarch, 
and when one is uncertain as to one's own morality, a strong 
suspicion is usually entertained as to that of others. Alexander 
had not withdrawn his troops from the Danubian Provinces, 
which suggested that he still had in view the partition of the 
Ottoman Empire, while Napoleon, until his misfortunes in the 
Peninsula, had seen fit to keep a large number of troops in 
Silesia. Spain and Portugal were stepping -stones to the East as 
well as necessary acquis itions for the enforcement of his 
Continental System, facts quite well comprehended by the 
Czar of all the Russias. Napoleon, who was as well informed 
concerning his ally's weak spot, threw out suggestions for an expedition to India, and consented to Finla nd, Moldavia, and 
Wallachia being added to the Russian Empire. Alexander 
returned these courtesies by approving of Napoleon's recent 
moves regarding Naples, Tuscany, and the Peninsula, and 
promised to lend his aid should Austria come to blows with 
France. "We talked of the affairs of Turkey at Erfurt," the 
Emperor told Las Cases at St Helena. "Alexander was very 
desirous that I should consent to his obtaining possession of 
Constantinople, but I could never bring my mind to consent to 
it. It is the finest ha rbour in the world, is placed in the finest 
situation, and is itself worth a kingdom." As a concession to 
Prussia, probably because of the Czar's wish, Silesia was to be 
returned to her former possessor.  
Chancellor Pasquier says of Napoleon at Erfurt that  
"On no other occasion, perhaps, did the suppleness and 
craftiness of his Italian spirit shine to more brilliant 
advantage." Boutourlin avers that notwithstanding these 
qualities Alexander felt that when the interests of Napoleon 
were adversely affected th e friendship would not last, "that the 
grand crisis was approaching which was destined either to 
consolidate the universal empire which the French Emperor 
was endeavouring to establish on the Continent, or to break the 
chains which retained so many Contine ntal States under his 
rule."  
Mention must be made of the interviews which took 
place at this time between Napoleon and Wieland and Goethe, 
two of the greatest literary geniuses which Germany has given 
to the republic of letters. Both poets were fascinated  by the 
magic personality of Napoleon, and both have left us some 
record of their conversation with the man who at this period 
was in very truth a ruler of kings.  
"I had been but a few minutes in the room," Wieland 
says, "when Napoleon crossed it to come to us. I was 
presented by the Duchess of Weimar. He paid me some 
compliments in an affable tone, fixing his eye piercingly upon 
me. Few men have appeared to me to possess, in the same 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  93 degree, the power of penetrating at a glance the thoughts of 
others. I h ave never beheld anyone more calm, more simple, 
more mild, or less ostentatious in appearance. Nothing about 
him indicated the feeling of power in a great monarch. He 
spoke to me as an old acquaintance would speak to an equal. 
'That was more extraordinary on his part, he conversed with 
me exclusively for an hour and a half, to the great surprise of 
the assembly. He appeared to have no relish for anything gay. 
In spite of the prepossessing amenity of his manners, he 
seemed to me to be of bronze. Towards midn ight I began to 
feel that it was improper to detain him so long, and I took the 
liberty to request permission to retire: 'Go, then,' said he in a 
friendly tone. 'Goodnight.' "  
The Emperor conferred the Cross of the Legion of 
Honour on Wieland, a mark of I mperial favour which he 
likewise showed to Goethe. The interview between Napoleon 
and the latter took place on the 2nd October 1808, in the 
presence of Talleyrand, Daru, Berthier, and Savary. "You are a 
man!" he exclaimed, either in a burst of admiration o r of 
flattery, and then he asked the poet his age and particulars of 
his work, adding that he had read "Werther" seven times and 
had taken the volume to Egypt. "After various remarks, all 
very just," says Goethe, "he pointed out a passage, and asked 
me why  I had written so, it was contrary to nature. This 
opinion he developed in great clearness. I listened calmly, and 
smilingly replied that I did not know whether the objection 
had been made before; but that I found it perfectly just. . . . 
The Emperor seeme d satisfied and returned to the drama, 
criticising it like a man who had studied the tragic stage with 
the attention of a criminal judge, and who was keenly alive to 
the fault of the French in departing from nature. He 
disapproved of all pieces in which Fa te played a part. 'Those 
pieces belong to a dark epoch. Besides, what do they mean by 
Fate? Politics are Fate!'"  
Even more interesting perhaps, because it so 
essentially reveals Napoleon's outlook on life, was a remark he made at a later meeting at which both Wieland and Goethe 
were present. He wished the latter to treat of the "Death of 
Caesar." "That," he said, "should be the great task of your life. 
In that tragedy you should show the world how much Cesar 
would have done for humanity, if only he had bee n allowed 
time to carry out his great plans." When we reflect on the 
events which had immediately preceded this notable utterance, 
on the grandiose schemes which were then being actively 
promulgated by the speaker for the conquest of Europe and the 
advance ment of his Empire of the West, we can understand 
why Napoleon wished to woo this literary giant to his cause. 
"Come to Paris," Napoleon said in his abrupt, commanding 
way, "I desire it of you. There you will find a wider circle for 
your spirit of observat ion; there you will find enormous 
material for poetic creations." But it was not to be; Goethe had 
other wishes and ideals. Had he acceded to the despot's request 
the result would have been no more felicitous than that which 
had attended Voltaire's removal  to the Court of Frederick the 
Great. Goethe loved Prussia too well to desert her, and while 
he admired Napoleon in some ways he did not admire him in 
all.  
Peace with Great Britain was suggested by the two 
Emperors at Erfurt, but England had far too much to lose to 
seriously entertain such an overture. In his reply Canning 
made it perfectly clear that George III. was not prepared to 
break faith with his Portuguese, Sicilian, and Spanish allies. 
Both the King and his Minister fully realised the nature of th e 
undertaking upon which they had embarked, and having put 
their hands to the plough there was to be no turning back. 
Their course gave rise to many blunders abroad and many 
heart -burnings at home, yet they loyally followed the precept 
of the great man who se ashes were now lying in Westminster 
Abbey. "England," said Pitt in his last public speech, "has 
saved herself by her exertions, and will, as I trust, save Europe 
by her example."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  94 We must now glance across the Pyrenees at the strife 
still going on in th e Peninsula. Had Sir John Moore secured 
the active and loyal assistance of the people, as he clearly had 
a right to expect, all might have been well with the cause of 
the allies. The preliminary successes of the Spaniards, 
however, had made them over -confi dent, and over -confidence 
is a sure prelude to disaster. Of all their many mistakes, the 
most fatal was their preference for fighting with independent 
corps, each under a Captain -General. Instead of joining 
together in the common cause there was considerab le rivalry 
and many misunderstandings between the various forces. As a 
consequence when Napoleon, feeling comparatively secure 
from Austrian menaces because of the Russian alliance, 
determined to lead his armies in person, the Spaniards were 
but ill -organi zed. Their antagonist, on the contrary, soon had 
at his disposal 300,000 trained soldiers divided into eight 
corps under his most skilled generals. "In a few days," the 
Emperor said before leaving Paris, "I shall set out to place 
myself at the head of my a rmy, and, with the aid of God, 
crown at Madrid the King of Spain, and plant my eagles on the 
towers of Lisbon." The Spaniards could not muster at the 
moment more than 76,000 men, and whereas their cavalry 
totaled 2000, that of Napoleon was at least twenty times the 
number. A reserve of nearly 60,000 Spaniards was gathering 
in the rear, but would not be available for the first desperate 
onslaught, on the result of which so much would depend. The 
British army of some 30,000 was, by a series of misfortunes, 
in three divisions and unable to come up with any of the 
Spanish armies, which were also separated.  
Napoleon began his movements and got into action 
while his opponents were thinking of what was likely to 
happen. Blake's ragged patriots were scattered by Le febvre 
early in November after having been defeated at Tornosa and 
Reynosa. Soult defeated the army under the Count de 
Belvidere at Burgos on the 10th November, the Spaniards 
suffering a loss of 2000 men and 800 prisoners, as well as their 
ammunition and s tores. The town, after having been pillaged, became the Emperor's headquarters. On the 22nd of the same 
month Castanos' forces, augmented by the men under Palafox, 
and amounting in all to 43,000, were routed by the 35,000 
troops opposed to them by Lannes. After such a series of 
defeats it was not difficult for the Emperor to push towards 
Madrid, the outskirts of which he reached, after forcing the 
Somosierra Pass, on the 2nd December. The inhabitants made 
some show of resistance, but they were so badly orga nized as 
to preclude any possibility of serious defensive measures. 
Wishing to spare the city from bombardment, Napoleon sent a 
flag of truce, and a capitulation was speedily signed.  
A soldier who was present thus relates the entry of the 
French into Madr id: "A heavy silence," he says, "had 
succeeded that confusion and uproar which had reigned within 
and without the walls of the capital only the day before. The 
streets through which we entered were deserted; and even in 
the market -place, the numerous shops  of the vendors of 
necessaries still remained shut. The water -carriers were the 
only people of the town who had not interrupted their usual 
avocations. They moved about uttering their cries with the 
nasal, drawling tone, peculiar to their native mountains of 
Galicia, 'Quien quiere agua?' —Who wants water? No 
purchasers made their appearance; the waterman muttered to 
himself sorrowfully, 'Dios que la da,' —It is God's gift, —and 
cried again.  
"As we advanced into the heart of the city, we 
perceived groups of Sp aniards standing at the corner of a 
square, where they had formerly been in the habit of 
assembling in great numbers. They stood muffled in their 
capacious cloaks, regarding us with a sullen, dejected aspect. 
Their national pride could scarcely let them cr edit that any 
other than Spanish soldiers could have beaten Spaniards. If 
they happened to perceive among our ranks a horse which had 
once belonged to their cavalry, they soon distinguished him by 
his pace, and awakening from their apathy, would whisper 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  95 together: 'Este caballo es Espanol' —That's a Spanish horse; as 
if they had discovered the sole cause of our success."  
On the 7th December 1808, Napoleon issued a 
proclamation which was largely a fierce tirade against England 
and the English, whose armies we re to be chased from the 
Peninsula. In the constitution which he framed for the nation 
he abolished the iniquitous Inquisition, and the old feudal 
system which had held Spain in its shackles for so long, 
reduced the number of monasteries and convents by tw o-
thirds, improved the customs, and endeavoured to institute 
reforms which would have been beneficial. "It depends upon 
you," the Emperor told the people, "whether this moderate 
constitution which I offer you shall henceforth be your law. 
Should all my eff orts prove vain, and should you refuse to 
justify my confidence, then nothing will remain for me but to 
treat you as a conquered province and find a new throne for 
my brother. In that case I shall myself assume the crown of 
Spain and teach the ill -disposed  to respect that crown, for God 
has given me the power and the will to overcome all 
obstacles."  
The concluding words are noteworthy. Napoleon now 
regarded himself as little less than omnipotent. Impelled by the 
force of his own volition, into a dangerous situation, he was to 
find it impossible to draw back when the nations which he had 
treated with contempt felt that self -confidence which alone 
made Leipzig and Waterloo possible. The Peninsular War was 
indeed what Talleyrand prophesied, "the beginning of t he 
end."  
After considerable hesitation, due to the varying and 
oftentimes contradictory accounts which he received as to 
what was actually happening in the field, Sir John Moore, 
having concentrated his troops, cautiously began to close upon 
Souk's army o n the banks of the river Carrion. When Napoleon 
heard of this he speedily decided to crush the friends of Spain 
and Portugal by sheer force of numbers, God, according to him, being "on the side of the biggest battalions," a parallel 
remark to Nelson's "Onl y numbers can annihilate."  
Winter had set in with severity, but disregarding the 
inclemency of the weather, the Emperor marched with his 
40,000 men along the Guadarrama Pass through the blinding 
sleet, traversing no fewer than twenty miles a day for ten d ays. 
Meanwhile Moore had given up hope of attacking and had 
decided to retreat as rapidly as possible. Unfortunately his 
troops did not follow the example of their noble commander; 
they broke away from every restraint, drinking and pillaging 
whenever they had opportunity. It is only just to add, however, 
that at Lugo, when there seemed an opportunity to contest 
Soult, who was following in their track, they stood to arms 
with a confidence and precision worthy of the best disciplined 
regiment in the British s ervice. Lord Paget's corps, which 
covered the retreat, behaved with conspicuous bravery, and 
succeeded in worsting some of the chasseurs, the "Invincibles" 
of the French army.  
"Before our reserve left Lugo," writes a soldier of the 
75th Regiment who endur ed the hardships of this terrible 
retreat, "general orders were issued, warning and exhorting us 
to keep order, and to march together; but, alas! how could men 
observe order amidst such sufferings, or men whose feet were 
naked and sore, keep up with men wh o, being more fortunate, 
had better shoes and stronger constitutions? The officers in 
many points, suffered almost as much as the men. I have seen 
officers of the Guards, and others, worth thousands, with 
pieces of old blanket wrapped round their feet and legs; the 
men pointing at them, with a malicious satisfaction, saying 
'There goes three thousand a year'; or 'There goes the prodigal 
son, on his return to his father, cured of his wanderings.'"  
On the 11th January 1809, Coruna was reached, and 
several da ys afterwards the welcome sails of the British troop -
ships made their appearance, ready to convey the survivors of 
the battle to be fought on the 16th to England and to home. 
Soult had the advantage of 4000 more troops and of a better 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  96 position, but lacked ammunition, while the British general had 
been able to obtain a supply of new muskets from the vessels 
which rode at anchor in the Bay.  
It was round the little village of Elvina that the fight 
raged most fiercely, for a French battery of eleven guns was 
placed on a ridge not more than 600 yards off, and from this 
commanding position shells were hurled at the British 
defenders with ruthless fury. Elvina was taken by the French 
and recaptured by the gallantry of Charles Napier, who led the 
fearless Irishmen of the 50th regiment. He then endeavoured 
to secure the French battery, but without success, and during 
the charge he was wounded and made prisoner.  
"My brave 42nd," cried Moore, when the enemy was 
again advancing on the village, "if you have fired away a ll 
your ammunition, you have still your bayonets. Recollect 
Egypt! Remember Scotland! Come on, my brave 
countrymen!"  
"Sir John," according to an eye -witness, "was at the 
head of every charge." Indeed, he had several narrow escapes 
before he received his d eath-wound. He was talking to Napier 
when, records the latter, "a round shot struck the ground 
between his horse's feet and mine. The horse leaped round, 
and I also turned mechanically, but Moore forced the animal 
back, and asked me if I was hurt. 'No, sir .' Meanwhile a second 
shot had torn off the leg of a 42nd man, who screamed 
horribly and rolled about so as to excite agitation and alarm in 
others.  
The General said, 'This is nothing, my lads; keep your 
ranks. My good fellow, don't make such a noise; we must bear 
these things better.' He spoke sharply, but it had a good effect, 
for this man's cries had made an opening in the ranks, and the 
men shrank from the spot, although they had not done so when 
others had been hit who did not cry out. But again Moore  went 
off, and I saw him no more."  Sir John was struck by a cannon -ball which tore his 
flesh in several places and precluded all possibility of 
recovery. "I hope the people of England will be satisfied: I 
hope my country will do me justice," were the nobl e words 
which passed his parched lips as he lay dying on the field of 
victory.  
"We buried him darkly at dead of night,  
The sods with our bayonets turning;  
By the struggling moonbeam's misty light,  
And the lantern dimly burning."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  97  
CHAPTER XXIV  
THE AUSTRI AN CAMPAIGN  
(1809)  
On a certain memorable occasion, Walpole is said to 
have made the remark, "They are ringing the bells now; they 
will be wringing their hands soon!" with reference to a 
universal out -cry for war on the part of Great Britain. Had it 
been u ttered by an Austrian statesman at the beginning of 
1809, it would have been equally apposite. Thinking men 
recognised that the army was not yet prepared to meet 
Napoleon, despite the fact that since the Austerlitz campaign 
of 1805 the improvement of her m ilitary forces had engrossed 
the attention of Archduke Charles, the Commander -in-chief. 
He was convinced that his troops were not ready to take the 
field, and he led the peace party solely on this account. The 
war party, however, headed by Count Stadion, t he able and 
energetic Minister of Foreign Affairs, and aided by the 
Empress, who had considerable influence over her august 
husband, proved more powerful. Its supporters felt confident 
that as the war in Spain necessarily occupied so much of 
Napoleon's att ention, and had drawn off such a large 
proportion of his troops, the time to strike was come. Austrian 
diplomatists had vainly endeavoured to woo both Russia and 
Prussia without success; the Czar had no wish at that moment 
to break with his ally; Frederick  William trembled for his 
throne.  
In January 1809, war was imminent. Napoleon, 
deceived as to the real state of affairs in Spain, set out on his 
return journey to France on the 16th. He at once began to 
organise his forces, Berthier being placed in comman d until the Emperor's arrival at the seat of war. Napoleon's explicit 
instructions were as follows:  
"By the 1st April the corps of Marshal Davout, which 
broke up from the Oder and Lower Elbe on the 17th March, 
will be established between Nuremberg, Bamber g, and 
Baireuth: Massena will be around Ulm: Oudinot between 
Augsburg and Donauworth. From the 1st to the 15th, three 
French corps, 130,000 strong, besides 10,000 allies, the 
Bavarians in advance on the Iser, and the Wurtembergers in 
reserve, may be concen trated on the Danube at Ratisbon or 
Ingolstadt. Strong tetes-de-pont  should be thrown up at 
Augsburg, to secure the passage of the Lech at Ingolstadt, in 
order to be able to debouch to the left bank of the Danube; and 
above all at Passau, which should be able to hold out two or 
three months. The Emperor's object is to concentrate his army 
as soon as possible at Ratisbon: the position on the Lech is to 
be assumed only if it is attacked before the concentration at the 
former town is possible. The second corp s will be at Ratisbon 
by the 10th, and on that day Bessieres will also arrive with the 
reserve cavalry of the Guard: Davout will be at Nuremberg: 
Massena at Augsburg: Lefebvre at one or two marches from 
Ratisbon. Headquarters then may be safely established  in that 
town, in the midst of 200,000 men, guarding the right bank of 
the Danube from Ratisbon to Passau, by means of which 
stream provisions and supplies of every sort will be procured 
in abundance. Should the Austrians debouch from Bohemia or 
Ratisbon, Davout and Lefebvre should fall back on Ingolstadt 
or Donauworth."  
On the 9th April, when hostilities began, the strength 
of Napoleon's forces was as follows: —His newly -named 
Army of Germany, on the Danube, numbered 174,000 troops, 
including some 54,000 o f the Rhenish Confederacy; the Army 
of Italy consisted of 68,000; in Saxony there were about 
20,000; in Poland 19,000; in Dalmatia 10,500. Consequently 
the Emperor had 291,500 troops at his disposal, some 275,000 
of whom were ready to confront Austria by t he middle of the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  98 month. This is an enormous number when it is remembered 
that he was still at war with Spain, where 300,000 men were 
engaged, but he had had recourse to his old plan of forestalling 
the conscription, whereby he had obtained 80,000 recruits.   
The Austrian forces were divided into three armies: 
that of Germany, under Archduke Charles, consisting of 
189,684 troops; of Italy, under Archduke John, totaling 
64,768, including those for action in Tyrol under Chasteler; 
and of Galicia, under Archduke  Ferdinand, with 35,400; in all 
289,852. The Reserves, made up of the landwehr   and levées 
en masse   reached 244,247, but as Mr F. Loraine Petre points 
out in his masterly study of this campaign, only some 15,000 
of the landwehr   were used with the active army at the 
beginning of hostilities. "There was little of the spirit of war in 
the landwehr ," he adds, "and discipline was very bad. One 
battalion attacked and wounded its chief with the bayonet. 
Two others refused to march. Eleven Bohemian battalions 
could only be got to march when regular troops were added to 
them. Even then they only averaged about 500 men each, and 
those badly equipped and armed." But while this organisation 
was of little practical service at the moment, it was creating a 
healthy publi c opinion which could not fail to be beneficial in 
the years to come.  
Already Napoleon's military glory was beginning to 
decline. In some of his principles he "became false to himself," 
he omitted to make his orders to his subordinates sufficiently 
clear,  and on one occasion, in the early stage of the campaign, 
threw away "chances of a decisive battle which would then 
probably have made an end of the war." He also exhibited the 
utmost contempt for a country which "had profited by the 
lessons he had taught her," with the result that "her armies, and 
her commander -in-chief, were very different from the troops 
and leaders of 1796 and 1805," when he had crossed swords 
with Austria.  
Yet another failing is pointed out by Mr Petre. 
"Napoleon's wonderful successes  in every previous campaign," he notes, "and the height to which his power had 
risen, by the practical subjugation of all Europe to his 
dominion, tended to fan the flame of his pride, to make him 
deem himself invincible and infallible, to cause him to assu me 
that what he desired was certain to happen. The wish now 
began to be father to the thought. Of this we shall find 
numerous instances in this campaign, the most notable, 
perhaps, being when, notwithstanding Davout's positive 
assertions that the greater p art of the Austrian army was in 
front of himself, the Emperor persisted in believing that 
Charles was in full retreat on Vienna by the right bank of the 
Danube. His constant over -estimates of his own forces, not in 
bulletins but in letters to his generals and ministers, are other 
examples of this failing."  
The campaign opened in Bavaria, where 176,000 
Austrians assembled early in April 1809. Berthier, doubtless 
acting for the best as he conceived it, instead of concentrating 
at Ratisbon, Ingolstadt or Dona uworth according to orders, 
had seen fit to scatter his forces, "in the dangerous view," as 
Alison puts it, "of stopping the advance of the Austrians at all 
points." As a result of Berthier's blunder Davout at Ratisbon 
and Massena at Augsburg were thirty -five leagues from each 
other, and Archduke Charles with 100,000 troops were 
interposed between them. About Ingolstadt were the Bavarians 
under Wrede, Lefebvre, and the reserve under Oudinot, the 
only forces available to oppose the Austrians, whose march, 
fortunately for the French, was extremely slow.  
The Emperor arrived at Donauworth on the 17th April, 
and at once saw the danger. "What you have done appears so 
strange," he wrote to Berthier, "that if I was not aware of your 
friendship I should think you we re betraying me; Davout is at 
this moment more completely at the disposal of the Archduke 
than of myself."  
It was Napoleon's task to bring the two armies in touch 
with each other so that a combined movement might become 
possible. "One word will explain to  you the urgency of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  99 affairs," the Emperor wrote to Massena on the 18th. 
"Archduke Charles, with 80,000 men, debouched yesterday 
from Landshut on Ratisbon; the Bavarians contended the 
whole day with the advanced guard. Orders have been 
dispatched to Davout to move with 60,000 troops in the 
direction of Neustadt, where he will form a junction with the 
Bavarians. To -morrow (19th) all your troops who can be 
mustered at Pfaffenhofen, with the Wurtembergers, a division 
of cuirassiers, and every man you can collec t, should be in a 
condition to fall on the rear of Archduke Charles. A single 
glance must show you that never was more pressing occasion 
for diligence and activity than at present. With 60,000 good 
troops, Davout may indeed make head against the Archduke; 
but I consider him ruined without resource, if Oudinot and 
your three divisions are on his rear before daybreak on the 
19th, and you inspire the soldiers with all they should feel on 
so momentous an occasion. Everything leads us to the belief 
that between the 18th, 19th, and 20th, all the affairs of 
Germany will be decided."  
On the 19th Davout withdrew from Ratisbon, leaving 
only the 65th French infantry to guard the bridge over the 
Danube, and after a severe but indecisive action at Haussen, 
reached Abens berg in the evening, thereby effecting his 
junction with Lefebvre. At Pfaffenhofen Massena defeated a 
body of the enemy and remained there. Archduke Charles had 
foolishly divided his army, and while he was marching on 
Ratisbon, Archduke Louis and Hiller, w ith 42,000 troops 
forming the Austrian left wing, were brought to action at 
Abensberg by Napoleon on the 20th. The day remained with 
the French, who numbered 55,000, their enemies losing over 
2700 killed and wounded, and some 4000 prisoners. 
According to M r Petre, about 25,000 soldiers only on either 
side came into action. The defeated Austrians retreated in the 
direction of Landshut, several of the energetic Bavarian 
battalions following them. After a spirited fight, during which 
ammunition ran out and man y men were killed and wounded, 
the solitary regiment which held Ratisbon was forced to surrender on the same day, half the troops of the G5th being 
taken prisoners.  
On the morning of the 21st Napoleon renewed the 
battle against the Austrian left. About 90 00 men were added to 
the enemy's already extensive losses, and it had the desired 
effect of preventing them from joining the main army. Davout 
and Lefebvre also engaged the Austrian centre, which 
retreated, leaving many wounded and dead on the field.  
The Emperor was now ready to give attention to 
Archduke Charles who, with 74,000 troops, was bent on 
destroying Davout. The French Marshal was in a tight corner, 
the Austrian main army being opposed to him, and not to 
Napoleon, as the Emperor had supposed on t he morning of 
Abensberg. As we have seen, it was only the left wing which 
he had defeated on the 20th.  
When the Archduke heard that Napoleon was on his 
track he abandoned the idea of attacking Davout and made his 
dispositions to meet the Emperor. Immediat ely they came up, 
the bridge, village, and chateau of Eckmuhl were captured by 
the French. The heights were stormed in truly magnificent 
style, and a brave attempt was made by the Bavarian cavalry 
to capture the enemy's battery on the Bettelberg, which was  
doing considerable execution. They were driven back, but an 
hour later a French cuirassier regiment captured the greater 
part of the guns, with the result that Rosenberg, the 
commander of the fourth Austrian army corps, was forced to 
retreat. The Emperor then ordered the cavalry and infantry to 
pursue the unfortunate Imperialists, who broke away almost in 
a panic.  
It now became evident that a general retreat was 
necessary, the Austrian left wing making in the direction of the 
river Isar, the main army, af ter a further sharp conflict with the 
enemy, reaching the Danube, the idea being to retire into the 
forests of Bohemia. It is calculated that nearly 10,000 
Austrians were killed, wounded, or taken prisoners on this 
terrible day.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  100 At St Helena, where, like the old soldiers in Chelsea 
Hospital, Napoleon so often "fought his battles o'er again," he 
frequently referred to the battle of Eckmuhl. On one occasion 
he called it "that superb manoeuvre, the finest that I ever 
executed," attributing its indecisiveness to his lack of sleep on 
the previous night.  
Under cover of night, and during the early hours of the 
morning of the 23rd, the cumbersome baggage of the 
Imperialists was hurried across the bridge which spans the 
Danube at Ratisbon. This was followed by the retreat of part 
of the army over a pontoon bridge hastily put together, the 
Austrian rearguard protecting the necessarily slow and 
somewhat difficult passage. Nine battalions only remained on 
the right bank of the river when Napoleon was making his 
final p reparations to take the walled town of Ratisbon by 
assault. Fighting had already begun near the town. Ladders 
were secured, and the intrepid Lannes was soon within the old -
time fortress, which speedily capitulated.  
In his Incident of the French Camp   Brow ning has 
sung of a lad who took part in the storming. He depicts 
Napoleon standing on a little mound  
"With neck out -thrust, you fancy how, Legs wide, arms locked 
behind, As if to balance the prone brow Oppressive with its mind."  
The Emperor soliloquises that if Lannes "waver at 
yonder wall" his plans may miscarry, when —  
"Out 'twixt the battery -smokes there flew  
A rider, bound on bound  
Full-galloping; nor bridle drew  
Until he reached the mound.  
 
"Then off there flung in smiling joy,  
And held himself ere ct 
By just his horse's mane, a boy:  
You hardly could suspect — 
(So tight he kept his lips compressed,  
Scarce any blood came through)  You looked twice ere you saw his breast  
Was all but shot in two.  
 
"'Well,' cried he, 'Emperor, by God's grace  
We've got you Ratisbon!  
The Marshal's in the market -place,  
And you'll be there anon  
To see your flag -bird flap his vans  
Where I, to heart's desire,  
Perched him!'"  
Napoleon's eye flashed with the pride of victory, but 
presently:  
"Softened itself, as sheathes  
A film th e mother -eagle's eye  
When her bruised eaglet breathes;  
'You're wounded!' 'Nay,' the soldier's pride  
Touched to the quick, he said:  
'I'm killed, Sire!' And his chief beside  
Smiling the boy fell dead."  
The Emperor himself was slightly wounded while 
direc ting operations. A spent musket -ball struck his right foot 
and caused him considerable pain. "Ah! I am hit," he remarked 
quietly, adding with grim humour, "It must have been a 
Tyrolese marksman to have struck me at such a distance. 
Those fellows fire with wonderful precision." The matter soon 
got noised abroad; the news was passed from rank to rank that 
the "little Corporal "was wounded. Anxiety was evident in 
almost every face. Men who had seen many a comrade struck 
down and had not so much as moved a musc le of their features 
took on a look of care and of pain until reassured that the 
Emperor's injury was a mere contusion. A louder cheer was 
never raised during the whole of his career, than when 
Napoleon rode along the lines a little later. Not till then we re 
"his children" convinced of his safety.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  101 Thus ended what has been called the Campaign of 
Ratisbon, during the five days of which, according to Major -
General August Keim, the Imperialists lost nearly 40,000 
troops in killed, wounded , and prisoners. Truly  a prodigious 
number and eloquent proof of the valour and energy of their 
opponents.  
There was now nothing to prevent Napoleon from 
presenting himself before Vienna, but while his troops, flushed 
with success, were marching towards that picturesque city, 
their leader heard grave and disquieting news. The Bavarians 
under Wrede had been defeated on the 24th April by the 
retreating Austrians under Hiller, who was endeavouring to 
come up with Archduke Charles. Bessieres had also been 
forced to retire. In addit ion Prince Eugene and the army of 
Italy had met with disaster at the hands of Archduke John at 
Sacile eight days before, and had not an immediate 
concentration of the various Austrian armies become essential 
for the defence of Vienna the consequences must have been 
serious.  
Marshal Macdonald points out in his Recollections  that 
a defeat in Italy was of secondary importance; the decisive 
point was Germany. There is, however, a moral point of view 
to be taken into consideration in warfare, to which he also 
draws attention. "It might have a bad effect," he says, "upon 
the Italian mind, already prejudiced against us, kept under as 
they were, but not conquered; and upon that of the Germans 
and their armies, although they had been so often beaten, and 
their terri tory so often invaded by us. But they were like the 
teeth of Cadmus; no sooner was one army destroyed than 
another came to take its place. They seemed to rise out of the 
ground." Napoleon was aware that the Tyrolese had broken 
out in revolt, and that simil ar movements were expected in 
other places.  
It is unnecessary to follow all the Emperor's 
movements on his march to the Imperial city. Bessieres, with 
comparatively few troops at his disposal, came in conflict with a much larger force under Hiller, and wa s repulsed. The 
Marshal somewhat retrieved this mishap by crossing the Inn at 
Passau, where he took several hundred prisoners. These 
"affairs" were but skirmishes to the battle of Ebelsberg 
(sometimes spelt Ebersberg) on the 3rd May 1809 between 
General Hi ller and the French vanguard under the impetuous 
Massena, at which Napoleon was not present. Hiller had taken 
up his position at Ebelsberg, crossing the long wooden bridge 
over the turbulent Traun, a tributary of the Danube, to which 
admittance was only ga ined by an extremely narrow gateway 
beneath a tower, while the whole structure was at the mercy of 
the guns in and near the castle on the heights above. For 
purposes of defence the situation approached the ideal, the 
only thing needed being a skilful comma nder. The day proved 
that the Austrian general was lacking in nearly all the qualities 
possessed by the French officers who opposed him, and was 
unworthy the men who fought in the ranks. A desperate 
struggle led by the fearless Coehorn took place on the br idge; 
men were flung into the surging waters below, while the 
Austrian artillery -men, perhaps not knowing that many 
Austrians were on the frail structure, fired at the combatants 
on the bridge with disastrous results to their own side. To 
make matters wors e several ammunition waggons blew up. It 
was a repetition of the scene on the Bridge of Lodi, only the 
carnage was more terrible. Once across, the castle became the 
next objective of the French, but it was not captured until 
many a gallant soldier had lost  his life in a hand -to-hand 
struggle in the town below. Hitherto only a comparatively 
small number of Massena's troops had maintained the fight, 
but the Marshal now hurried fresh men across the bridge to 
support those engaged with the enemy. Gradually the men 
fought their way to the castle, and Mr Petre tells us that of one 
regiment which appeared before it, Colonel Pouget, who 
commanded, alone escaped without a wound.  
"The entrance to the castle," Mr Petre writes, "was by a 
vaulted archway open at the out er end, but closed by a strong 
wooden gate at the inner end. Above was a window, closely 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  102 barred with iron and with loopholes on either side. From all of 
these there poured a heavy fire, especially from the grated 
window. The losses of the besiegers, as the y stood and 
returned the fire from the exposed space between the archway 
and the mouth of the hollow road, were fearful. Men crowded 
up to take part in the fight, which was directed by Pouget from 
the angle of the archway, whence he could both see his own 
men and the grated window. The French infantry fired as 
quickly as they could; some even used the dead bodies of their 
comrades to raise them more on to a level with the window. 
Then Pouget sent for a well -known sportsman, Lieutenant 
Guyot, who, taking pos t within five yards of the window, 
poured in shots as fast as loaded muskets could be handed to 
him by the soldiers. Other picked marksmen joined him, and, 
at last, the Austrian fire began to fail. Sappers had now arrived 
and were at work breaking in the t hick gate.  
"In the enthusiasm of the fight Colonel Baudinot and 
Sub-Lieutenant Gerard of the 2nd battalion had managed to 
get forward, though most of their battalion was blocked in the 
narrow road behind. These two intrepid men, followed by a 
few others a s brave as themselves, managed to find a way by 
the cellar ventilators, whence they got into the castle. Between 
Gerard and a grenadier of the garrison, who entered a room on 
the first floor simultaneously, there was a desperate encounter, 
which was not in terfered with by the entrance of a third visitor 
in the shape of an Austrian round shot. Just at this moment the 
gate was broken in, and the garrison, including, presumably, 
Gerard's grenadier, very soon surrendered as prisoners of war."  
Surely no more th rilling adventure than this is to be 
found in any story book? And yet it is but one of many that 
might be related of this campaign alone, could this volume be 
extended beyond the present limits.  
But the storming of the castle of Ebelsberg was not yet 
over. The burning town had been cleared of the Imperialists, 
who were now pouring a veritable hail of shot on the besiegers 
from the surrounding heights, and their situation was perilous in the extreme, cut off as they were from their friends and 
surrounded on ly by their foes. Why the Austrians should have 
begun to retreat when such an opportunity was offered them to 
annihilate the enemy is beyond comprehension. Such was the 
case, and they hastened towards Enns, leaving two thousand 
killed and wounded, and over  that number of prisoners. The 
French also lost very heavily. Late in the afternoon Napoleon 
came up, and in company with Savary, entered the town. He 
was by no means pleased with the terrible sights which met 
him on all sides, and bitterly lamented the he avy losses which 
his troops had suffered. Savary states that the Emperor 
remarked: "It were well if all promoters of wars could behold 
such an appalling picture. They would then discover how 
much evil humanity has to suffer from their projects." If he did 
thus speak, it shows how blinded he had become by his own 
egotism; for Napoleon had certainly forced the war on 
unhappy Austria, now sorely discomfited by the turn events 
had taken.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  103 CHAPTER XXV  
THE AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN CONTINUED  
(1809)  
On the 10th May 1809,  the French were before Vienna, 
and preparations were made for a vigorous attack. Late in the 
evening of the 11th the Emperor's artillerymen began to hurl 
shells into the city, which was but ill -defended by Archduke 
Maximilian, who thought too much of his own skin to be of 
any considerable service, and speedily retired with his troops 
from the capital. Within forty -eight hours of the first shot 
being fired many of the French troops were in Vienna, the 
Emperor taking up his quarters in the palace of Schonbru nn 
near by.  
Here he issued a decree annexing Rome, to which Pius 
VII. retorted with a Bull of excommunication. Napoleon, 
always an admirer of Charlemagne, referred to that monarch as 
"our august predecessor." He had already hinted that the Pope 
should be no more than Bishop of Rome, as was the case 
under the rule of the founder of the Empire of the West. 
Several weeks later the Holy Father was escorted from the 
Quirinal to Avignon, and thence to Savona, in which quiet 
retreat the Emperor hoped he would com e to his senses, in 
other words, to Napoleon's way of thinking. This is exactly 
what the aged and determined Pontiff did not do, however. He 
preferred to remain virtually a prisoner and to pray for the 
recovery of his temporal kingdom rather than to submit  to the 
dictatorship of the Emperor. The latter did not see fit to relent 
until 1814, the Pope then being at Fontainebleau. He offered to 
restore a portion of his states, but Pius VII. refused to discuss 
any terms except from Rome, to which city he returne d on the 
Emperor's abdication.  Decisive victory over his Austrian foes had yet to be 
gained by Napoleon, and while Hillier was slowly 
endeavouring to unite with Archduke Charles on the left bank 
of the Danube, the Emperor was laying his well -conceived 
plans before his generals.  
The following interesting anecdote is related of this 
campaign. It shows how a raw recruit may become imbued 
with a keen sense of responsibility after spending a few 
months in the ranks.  
A sentinel, Jean Baptiste Coluche, was stat ioned by 
two paths near the Emperor's temporary headquarters on a 
certain night. He had been told to allow no one to pass, so 
when his quick ears detected a scrunch on the gravel some 
distance away, he carried out his instructions without question. 
Jean sh outed to the intruder to stop. No notice was taken; the 
heavy, measured steps drew nearer. Again he repeated his 
summons, and bringing his carbine to his shoulder, prepared to 
fire. At that moment the outline of a dark and unmistakable 
figure approached. I t was the Emperor himself. When the 
guard, alarmed by the cries, came up to render assistance, they 
set to chaffing Coluche, but the only reply of the peasant 
conscript was: "I've carried out my orders."  
This was by no means the only occasion on which the  
Emperor appeared when least expected, and he was wont to 
reward the soldier whom he found on the qui Vive   under such 
circumstances. It was not so with the faithful Coluche. But in 
1814 the much -coveted Cross of the Legion of honour was 
pinned on his brea st for his heroism at the battle of Arcis -sur-
Aube, when the man whom he had ordered to halt before the 
walls of Vienna was forced to beat a retreat.  
Bourrienne relates another interesting anecdote told to 
him by Rapp, the Emperor's aide -de-camp during th e Austrian 
campaign. It concerns "one of those striking remarks of 
Napoleon," to quote Bourrienne, "which, when his words are 
compared with the events that follow them, would almost 
appear to indicate a foresight of his future destiny. The 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  104 Emperor, when wi thin a few day's march of Vienna, procured 
a guide to explain to him the names of every village, or ruin, 
however insignificant, that presented itself on his road. The 
guide pointed to an eminence, on which were still visible a 
few remaining vestiges of an  old fortified castle. 'Those,' said 
the guide, 'are the ruins of the castle of Diernstein.' Napoleon 
suddenly stopped, and remained for some time silently 
contemplating the ruins, then turning to Marshal Lannes, who 
was with him, he said: 'See! yonder is the prison of Richard 
Coeur de Lion. He, too, like us, went to Syria and Palestine. 
But Coeur de Lion, my brave Lannes, was not more brave than 
you. He was more fortunate than I at St Jean d'Acre. A duke of 
Austria sold him to an emperor of Germany, who sh ut him up 
in yonder castle. Those were the days of barbarism. How 
different the civilisation of our times! The world has seen how 
I treated the Emperor of Austria, whom I might have 
imprisoned —and I would treat him so again. I take no credit to 
myself for this. In the present age crowned heads must be 
respected. A conqueror imprisoned!'" and yet that is exactly 
what happened to the speaker but a few years later.  
At last Archduke Charles and Hillier joined forces on 
the Marchfeld, intent on regaining the lo st capital. Napoleon 
had made up his mind to fight in the very camp of the enemy 
by crossing the Danube. For this purpose he built a succession 
of bridges consisting of boats and pontoons from Ebersdorf to 
the three islands in the river, and linked the las t and largest of 
these, that of Lobau, to the opposite bank.  
The first troops to cross occupied the stone -built 
villages of Aspern and Essling, which served somewhat as 
fortified places. The French found themselves confronted by 
quite double the number of  Imperialists. Both villages were 
attacked with feverish energy, the assault on Aspern being the 
more severe. It was ably defended by Massena, while Lannes 
at Essling fought as he had never done before. When Hight 
fell, the latter still successfully defied  the Austrians, while the 
white coats, after making repeated unsuccessful attempts to capture Aspern, had effected a lodgment in the church and the 
graveyard. This was partly due to the energy of Archduke 
Charles, who led the last attack of the day in pers on.  
 
 
 
AFTER  ASPERN   
Good use was made of the succeeding night by 
Napoleon. He hurried over as many troops as possible to the 
bank of the Danube occupied by the I mperialists, a necessarily 
slow process owing to the frequent breaches made in the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  105 temporary bridges by obstructions floated down the rapidly -
rising river by the Austrians. These difficulties taxed the 
resources of the engineers, but they stuck manfully to  their 
task, while the troops cared little if the pontoons were under 
water provided they could reach the opposite bank. Early on 
the 22nd May there were 63,000 troops ready to advance 
against the Imperialists who, not having been called upon to 
labour so arduously through the night as the French had done, 
were considerably fresher for the day's work. Fighting at 
Aspern and Essling had been resumed long since, if indeed it 
had left off, the first charge of the day being against the 
Austrian centre by Lannes . The French battalions sustained a 
raking fire from the enemy's artillery, some of whose infantry, 
however, soon showed such signs of weakness that Archduke 
Charles, as on the day before, caught up a standard and 
shouted to the grenadiers to follow him. T hey did so to such 
good purpose that further progress of the French infantry was 
impossible. Nor did their comrades of the cavalry, sent to their 
relief under Bessieres, fare better. According to some 
accounts, when victory seemed almost in the grasp of 
Napoleon's men, the Austrians were reinforced in the nick of 
time and Bessieres compelled to retire.  
Other disasters of an even more serious nature were in 
store for the French. The bridge between the right bank and 
the island of Lobau was severed, thus cut ting off all 
connection with the Emperor's troops and those fighting 
against the Austrians.  
Meanwhile the Archduke took advantage of his 
enemy's discomfiture by attacking the two villages which had 
figured so prominently in the contest of the previous day  with 
greater energy than ever. Still the French fought on. Many a 
brave man fell in the desperate struggle, which finally resulted 
in Aspern being held by the Austrians and the French retaining 
Essling. The gallant Lannes had both his knees almost carried  
away by a shot when the battle was beginning to slacken. He 
had defended Essling with all his native genius and the most consummate bravery, amply retrieving his somewhat 
inglorious doings in the Spanish Campaign. The Emperor 
frequently visited the strick en Marshal, who shortly before he 
passed away feebly murmured: "Another hour and your 
Majesty will have lost one of your most zealous and faithful 
friends." This was on the last day of May, 1809, and the 
master whom he had served so well wrote to Josephine  in 
words which show how keenly he appreciated the fallen 
warrior: "The loss of the Duke of Montebello, who died this 
morning, deeply affects me. Thus all things end. Adieu, my 
love. If you can contribute to the consolation of the poor 
Marchioness, do it."  At St Helena the fallen King -maker said, 
"I found Lannes a dwarf, but I made him a giant!"  
On the following day (the 23rd), the bridge being now 
repaired, the French retired to well -wooded Lobau, soon to be 
re-named the Ile Napoleon. The honours of the f ight remained 
with the Austrians; the great Napoleon had been defeated! 
True to his creed, the Emperor announced a victory, "since we 
remain masters of the field of battle," and admitted simply that 
the fight had been "severe," in which latter contention h e was 
indisputably correct. Success or failure, it proved to his 
enemies that either Napoleon's genius for war was failing or 
that he had undertaken more than he could carry out. This 
disaster, added to those which had occurred in the Peninsula, 
was regard ed as proof positive in certain quarters that 
Napoleon's star was setting. They took little account of the fact 
that the French forces had been greatly outnumbered both in 
men and munitions of war, remembering only that they had 
retreated. Beaten many time s before, a defeat or two more did 
not affect the prestige of the Imperialists, but for the hitherto 
invincible warrior no excuse was found.  
Encouraged by the French reverse, an alliance between 
Austria and Prussia was now mooted, but Frederick William 
showed his usual indecision, and consequently the 
negotiations collapsed, to the great disappointment of the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  106 Emperor Francis's hope of an almost unanimous rising in 
Germany.  
Had the King of Prussia possessed some of the pluck 
displayed by several officers w ho had served in his army, and 
now attempted to raise the standard of revolt against Napoleon 
in Westphalia and Saxony, Frederick William III. would have 
been a less sorry figure in the history of his country. For 
instance, Baron von Dornberg headed a camp aign against the 
unpopular King Jerome, while Major Frederick von Schill, 
after attempting to capture Wittenberg and Magdeburg, laid 
down his life for the national cause in the assault on Stralsund. 
Neither of these soldiers of fortune accomplished anythin g of 
importance, mainly because the means at their disposal were 
abnormally small, but they displayed a spirit of true patriotism. 
Duke Frederick William of Brunswick -Gels succeeded in 
occupying Dresden and Leipzig and in forcing Jerome to 
retreat, but in the end the enthusiastic volunteer and his Black 
Band were compelled to seek refuge on British ships and sail 
for England.  
For seven weeks after the battle of Aspern the two 
armies prepared for the next contest, but in expedition and 
thoroughness Napoleon  far outstripped his opponents. If 
occasional fighting sometimes occurred it was usually no more 
than an affair of outposts. Both sides were far too busily 
engaged in repairing their misfortunes, securing 
reinforcements and additional supplies, to waste me n and 
ammunition in conflicts which could not be other than 
indecisive. Napoleon took good care to see that the new 
bridges were more solidly constructed than those which had 
contributed so much to his defeat. Not only were his 
arrangements for their prote ction more complete, but gunboats 
were stationed in suitable positions for their defence. Lobau 
was entrenched and fortified; nothing was to be left to chance 
on the next occasion.  CHAPTER XXVI  
THE WAR IN POLAND AND TYROL  
(1809)  
At the beginning of July Napoleon's movements 
showed that a battle was imminent. By means of feints he 
succeeded in making the enemy believe that his plan was 
similar to that which had obtained at the battle of Aspern. 
Thus while the Austrians were occupying their attention with 
the bridge of Aspern, Napoleon's forces were crossing by 
movable bridges lower down the river, near Enzersdorf. This 
was accomplished during a tremendous thunder -storm, the rain 
soaking the poor fellows to the skin. On the 5th July the 
greater part of the t roops now at his disposal was ready for 
action, including those of Prince Euene. The Emperor's step -
son, successful against Archduke John at the battle of Raab on 
the 14th June —the anniversary of Marengo —had joined 
forces with Napoleon; his opponent was ha stening to the 
assistance of Archduke Charles. Marmont and Macdonald, 
after desultory fighting, also arrived at Lobau. The French 
army now outnumbered its opponents by 30,000 men.  
The battle of Wagram began on the 5th July, but the 
issue was not determine d until the following day. Macdonald, 
who played a prominent part in the fighting, as will be 
narrated, thus describes it in a private letter: —  
"The crossing of the Danube [on the 4th and 5th July] 
was a masterpiece of prodigious genius, and it was reserv ed 
for the Emperor to conceive, create, and carry it out. It was 
performed in presence of an army of over 180,000 men [in 
reality about 140,00]. The enemy expected the attempt to be 
made at the same point as that of May 21st. [First day of the 
battle of As pern.] They had prepared tremendous 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  107 entrenchments, and had brought up a formidable body of 
artillery; but, to their great surprise, they suddenly saw us 
attack their left flank and turn all the lines of their redoubts. 
We drove them back three leagues, and  when, next day, they 
tried conclusions with us, they lost the game.  
"Never, sir, had two armies a mightier force of 
artillery, never was battle fought more obstinately. Picture to 
yourself 1,000 or 1,200 pieces of artillery vomiting forth death 
upon near ly 350,000 combatants, and you will have an idea of 
what this hotly -disputed field of battle was like. The enemy, 
posted upon the heights, entrenched to the teeth in all the 
villages, formed a sort of crescent, or horse -shoe. The 
Emperor did not hesitate t o enter into the midst of them, and to 
take up a parallel position.  
"His Majesty did me the honour of giving me the 
command of a corps, with orders to break through the enemy's 
centre. I, fortunately, succeeded, notwithstanding the fire of a 
hundred guns,  masses of infantry, and charges of cavalry, led 
by the Archduke Charles in person. His infantry would never 
cross bayonets with mine, nor would his cavalry wait till mine 
came up; the Uhlans alone made a stand, and they were 
scattered.  
"I pursued the ene my closely with bayonet and cannon 
for about four leagues, and it was only at ten o'clock at night 
that, worn out and overwhelmed with fatigue, my men ceased 
their firing and their pursuit.  
"The same success attended us at all other points. His 
Majesty, w ho directed everything, amazed me by his coolness 
and by the precision of his orders. It was the first time I had 
fought under his eyes, and this opportunity gave me an even 
higher opinion than I already had of his great talents, as I was 
able to form my o wn judgment upon them. . . ."  
Napoleon had almost used up his reserves when the 
Austrian retreat began. No fewer than 24,000 dead and 
wounded Imperialists were left on the field, a loss of probably 6000 more than that sustained by the French. Not until 
daybreak on the 7th did the victorious troops lay down their 
arms. "I soon fell asleep," says Macdonald, "but not for long, 
as I was awakened by cries of 'Long live the Emperor!' which 
redoubled when he entered my camp. I asked for my horse, but 
he had been taken away. I had no other, as the rest were far 
behind. As I could not walk (the General had been kicked by 
the animal), I remained on my straw, when I heard someone 
enquiring for me. . . . He came by the Emperor's order to look 
for me. On my remarking th at I had no horse and could not 
walk, he offered me his, which I accepted. I saw the Emperor 
surrounded by my troops, whom he was congratulating. He 
approached me, and embracing me cordially, said:  
"'Let us be friends henceforward.'  
"'Yes,' I answered, ' till death.' And I have kept my 
word, not only up to the time of his abdication, but even 
beyond it. He added: 'You have behaved valiantly, and have 
rendered me the greatest services, as, indeed, throughout the 
entire campaign. On the battlefield of your g lory, where I owe 
you so large a part of yesterday's success, I make you a 
Marshal of France' (he used this expression instead of 'of the 
Empire'). You have long deserved it.'  
"'Sire,' I answered, 'since you are satisfied with us, let 
the rewards and reco mpenses be apportioned and distributed 
among my army corps, beginning with Generals Lamarque, 
Eroussier, and others, who so ably seconded me.'  
"'Anything you please,' he replied; 'I have nothing to 
refuse you.'"  
In this abrupt but characteristic way Macd onald was 
created a Marshal —a well -merited distinction also conferred 
on Oudinot and Marmont for their services in this campaign. 
Napoleon's opening remark as to friendship referred to the five 
years of disgrace which the general had suffered by being 
unjustly implicated in the affairs of Moreau, a disfavour now 
to fall on Bernadotte, whose corps had behaved ill at Wagram 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  108 and was dissolved. Thus almost at the same time as he gained 
a friend the Emperor made an enemy. It is interesting to note 
that Macdonald 's father was a Scotsman who fought for the 
Pretender and his mother a Frenchwoman, and that he was 
born at Sedan.  
Napoleon, usually the most active in following up a 
victory, did not actively pursue the Austrians after the battle of 
Wagram for the all -sufficient reason that his troops were 
worn -out with fatigue. If you want to know and see and feel  
what a battle -field is like, glance through the sombre pages of 
Carlyle's Sartor Resartus   until you come to his description of 
that of Wagram. Here is the pa ssage, and it is one of the most 
vivid in literature: "The greensward," says the philosopher, "is 
torn-up and trampled -down; man's fond care of it, his fruit -
trees, hedge -row, and pleasant dwellings, blown -away with 
gunpowder; and the kind seedfield lies a  desolate, hideous 
place of Skulls." There were two days of hard fighting at 
Znaym on the 10th and 11th July, in which Massena and 
Marmont took part, Napoleon not coming up until the morning 
of the second day. On the 12th an armistice was arranged.  
Brief notice must be taken of the course of the war in 
other parts of Europe. The formidable Walcheren Expedition, 
so called because of its disembarkation on the island of that 
name, was undertaken by Great Britain as a diversion against 
the French. The idea had  been mooted and shelved three years 
before, to be revived when Austria pressed the British 
Government to send troops to Northern Germany in the hope 
of fostering insurrection there. The Duke of Portland's 
government, prompted by Lord Castlereagh, thought that 
Antwerp would be a more desirable objective. Instead of the 
troops pushing on immediately to that city, Flushing must 
needs be first besieged and bombarded. This detour lost much 
precious time, which was used to good advantage by 
Bernadotte and King L ouis in placing the city in a state of 
defence,.  The commanders of the English naval and military 
forces—Sir Richard Strachan and Lord Chatham 
respectively —now engaged in unseemly wrangling as to 
further movements, while meantime many of the soldiers fell  
victims to malarial fever. Eventually the army sailed for home, 
after an immense expenditure of blood and treasure, thousands 
of men dying and the cost amounting to many millions of 
pounds sterling. The expedition was for long the talk of the 
British peop le, the affair being epitomized in a witty couplet 
which aptly summed up the situation:  
Lord Chatham, With His Sword Undrawn,  
Stood Waiting For Sir Richard Strachan;  
Sir Richard, Longing To Be At 'em,  
Stood Waiting For The Earl Of Chatham.  
In Spain thing s were going from bad to worse for Great 
Britain, and an expedition against Naples, commanded by Sir 
John Stewart, was eventually obliged to withdraw after some 
early successes. England felt the heavy hand of Napoleon very 
severely in the dark days of 1809 .  
We have noted that Archduke Ferdinand had troops to 
the number of 35,400 in Poland called the Army of Galicia. He 
was faced by Prince Galitzin and Prince Poniatovski, who had 
nearly 60,000 men, including Russians, Poles, and Saxons , 
under their command.  Warsaw was secured by the Austrians 
after the battle of Raszyn, but following an attack on Thorn the 
Archduke was compelled to retreat, hostilities in Poland being 
terminated by the armistice of Znaym.  
In Tyrol the peasant war was marked by many exciting  
events. The inhabitants of this picturesque land of forests and 
mountains were intensely patriotic and hated the Bavarians, 
under whose domination they had passed after Austerlitz, with 
an exceedingly bitter hatred. They felt that now was the time 
for rev enge, for showing that the country was at heart still 
loyal to the Emperor Francis, descendant of a long line of 
monarchs who had exercised their feudal rights for over four 
centuries. A section of Archduke John's army, amounting to 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  109 some 10,000 men under G eneral Chasteler, was accordingly 
sent to aid the ardent nationalists, who appointed their own 
leaders, the most celebrated of whom was Andreas Hofer, an 
innkeeper and cattle -dealer of considerable substance. A signal 
was agreed upon; when sawdust was seen  floating on the 
waters of the Inn the people of the villages through which the 
river flowed were to understand that a general rising was 
expected of them. There was no fear that the news would not 
reach outlying districts. The people did not fail their le aders, 
and Innsbruck, the capital of the province, then in the hands of 
the Bavarians, was attacked, and did not long resist the 
gallantry of the Tyrolese. Other garrisons met a similar fate, 
and in less than a week but one fortress still held out in 
North ern Tyrol, so well had the rugged fellows performed 
their self -appointed task. Unhappily for the intrepid patriots —
Napoleon with his usual partiality for misrepresentation called 
their leaders "brigands" —disasters succeeded their early 
victories, and Innsb ruck was held for but six weeks before 
Lefebvre put himself in possession. Again fortune smiled on 
the Tyrolese. Wrede, who commanded the Bavarians, unduly 
weakened his forces by sending various regiments to join 
Napoleon. Taking advantage of their knowled ge of this fact, 
20,000 peasants presented themselves before the capital and 
regained it. Two more battles were waged outside the walls of 
Innsbruck, and innumerable skirmishes took place with the 
large army which the Emperor now poured into Tyrol before 
the flames were finally extinguished in December 1809. It is 
safe to say that the ashes would have continued to smoulder 
much longer had not Hofer been the victim of treachery. He 
was betrayed to the enemy by an ungrateful priest, and, after 
trial, executed  on the 21st February 1810. Many of his 
colleagues availed themselves of an amnesty granted by Prince 
Eugene, but both Hofer and Peter Mayer preferred to fight to 
the end. The Emperor of Austria, grateful for the services 
rendered to him by the former innk eeper, provided the hero's 
widow with a handsome pension and ennobled his son.  On the 15th October 1809 peace was restored between 
France and Austria by the Treaty of Schonbrunn, sometimes 
called the Peace of Vienna, by which the former chiefly 
benefited.  More than once the negotiations trembled in the 
balance, but ultimately the Austrian war party was obliged to 
give way. Archduke Charles had grown tired of fighting, the 
wily Metternich could see nothing but disaster by its 
continuance. Just as business p eople sometimes ask a higher 
price than they expect to receive for an article of commerce 
and are content to be "beaten down," so Napoleon made 
extravagant demands at first and was satisfied with smaller 
concessions. The apparent readiness to give way, for  which he 
did not forget to claim credit, enabled him to pose as a 
political philanthropist. Nevertheless, three and a half million 
people were lost to Austria by the districts which she ceded to 
France, Bavaria, Russia, Saxony, Italy, and the Grand Duchy 
of Warsaw. Pursuing the same policy of army retrenchment he 
had followed with Prussia, Napoleon insisted that Austria 
should support not more than 150,000 troops. A big war 
indemnity was also exacted.  
The Emperor afterwards maintained that this "pound of 
flesh" was insufficient. "I committed a great fault after the 
battle of Wagram," he remarked, "in not reducing the power of 
Austria still more. She remained too strong for our safety, and 
to her we must attribute our ruin. The day after the battle, I 
shoul d have made known, by proclamation, that I would treat 
with Austria only on condition of the preliminary separation of 
the three crowns of Austria, Hungary, and Bohemia." As a 
matter of fact the abdication of the Emperor Francis had been 
one of his extorti onate demands in the early stages of the 
negotiations.  
If proof were necessary of the truth of the proverb that 
"truth is stranger than fiction" the marriage of Napoleon to the 
Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria, but a few months after 
he had threatened to dispossess her father of his throne, would 
surely justify it. Poor childless, light -hearted Josephine was 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  110 put away for this daughter of the Caesars. The Emperor had 
first asked for a Russian Princess, then as suddenly turned in 
the direction of the Hous e of Hapsburg because his former suit 
was not immediately accepted. From that time Napoleon's 
friendship with Alexander began to wane perceptibly. The 
Czar was under no delusion when he prophetically remarked, 
on hearing of the Emperor's change of front in  wooing an 
Austrian princess, "Then the next thing will be to drive us 
back into our forests."  
Small wonder that in after years Napoleon referred to 
his second marriage as "That abyss covered with flowers 
which was my ruin."  
To compare Napoleon's two con sorts is extremely 
difficult, because their temperaments were essentially 
different. Josephine was vivacious, witty, fond of dress and of 
admiration, and brought up in a very different school of 
thought to that of Marie Louise. The former had witnessed, 
and to some extent felt, the terrors of the Revolution at their 
worst; she had mixed with all sorts and conditions of men and 
women, some good, many bad; the latter had been nurtured 
with scrupulous care, so shielded and safeguarded that she 
scarcely knew of  the follies and sins which mar the everyday 
world. She once wrote to a friend that she believed Napoleon 
"is none other than Anti -Christ." When she heard that the man 
she felt to be "our oppressor" was to become her husband, she 
lifted her pale blue eyes to the skies and remarked that the 
birds were happier because they could choose their own 
mates! And yet, although she was so horrified, she had a 
certain nobility of character which enabled her to understand 
that in making the surrender she would be perfo rming a double 
duty to her father and to her country: "This marriage gives 
pleasure to my father, and though separation from my family 
always will make me miserable, I will have the consolation of 
having obeyed his wishes. And Providence, it is my firm 
belief, directs the lot of us princesses in a special manner; and 
in obeying my father I feel I am obeying Providence."  But what were the reasons for Napoleon's dissolution 
of his first marriage when his love for Josephine is beyond 
question? Pasquier thus s ums up the matter for us:  
"For some time, past," he says, "the greater number of 
those about him, and especially the members of his family, 
had been urging him to repudiate a union which could not give 
him an heir, and which precluded the idea of his drea ming of 
certain most advantageous alliances. As early as the time of 
his consecration as Emperor, the greatest pressure had been 
put upon him to prevent him from strengthening the bonds 
uniting him to Josephine, by having her crowned by his side; 
but all t hese endeavours had been neutralized by the natural 
and potent ascendancy of a woman full of charm and grace, 
who had given herself to him at a time when nothing gave any 
indication of his high destinies, whose conciliatory spirit had 
often removed from hi s path difficulties of a somewhat serious 
nature, and brought back to him many embittered or hostile 
minds, who seemed to have been constantly a kind of good 
genius, entrusted with the care of watching over his destiny 
and of dispelling the clouds which ca me to darken its horizon. 
. . .  
"I can never forget the evening," adds Pasquier, "on 
which the discarded Empress did the honours of her Court for 
the last time. It was the day before the official dissolution. A 
great throng was present, and supper was ser ved, according to 
custom, in the gallery of Diana, on a number of little tables. 
Josephine sat at the centre one, and the men went round her, 
waiting for that particularly graceful nod which she was in the 
habit of bestowing on those with whom she was acqu ainted. I 
stood at a short distance from her for a few minutes, and I 
could not help being struck with the perfection of her attitude 
in the presence of all these people who still did her homage, 
while knowing full well that it was for the last time; that,  in an 
hour, she would descend from the throne, and leave the palace 
never to re -enter it. Only women can rise superior to the 
difficulties of such a situation, but I have my doubts as to 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  111 whether a second one could have been found to do it with such 
perfec t grace and composure. Napoleon did not show as bold a 
front as did his victim."  
The Archduchess was in her eighteenth year, Napoleon 
in his forty -first. She was not without personal charms, 
although Pasquier, who keenly sympathised with Josephine, 
scarce ly does her justice. "Her face," he says, "was her 
weakest point; but her figure was fine, although somewhat 
stiff. Her personality was attractive, and she had very pretty 
feet and hands." The marriage was celebrated by proxy at 
Vienna on the 11th March 18 10.  
That Marie Louise grew to love the man of whom she 
once wrote that "the very sight of this creature would be the 
worst of all my sufferings" is very improbable, and in the end 
she played him false. She certainly showed no wish to join 
him at Elba, and  shortly after his death married the dissolute 
Adam Albert, Graf von Neipperg, her third husband being the 
Comte de Bombelles. The Emperor believed in her 
faithfulness to the last. "I desire," he said to his physician, 
Antommarchi, "that you preserve my he art in spirits of wine, 
and that you carry it to Parma to my dear Marie Louise. Please 
tell her that I loved her tenderly, and that I have not ceased to 
love her."  CHAPTER XXVII  
A BROKEN FRIENDSHIP AND WHAT IT BROUGHT  
(1810 -1812)  
Napoleon now entered wit h renewed zest upon the 
work of perfecting his Continental System, and in so doing he 
quarrelled with his brother Louis, King of Holland. The young 
monarch had followed a liberal policy, devoting his time and 
energy to the interests of his people, and earn ing their respect 
if not their love. Napoleon always regarded the land of dykes 
and wind -mills as scarcely more than a province of France; 
Louis was determined that his country should be independent. 
He was no believer in the Emperor's plan to keep out Bri tish 
goods, so profitable a source of revenue, and as a consequence 
an extensive business was carried on between Holland and 
England. Napoleon threatened, Louis temporized, until the 
former, holding the trump card, finally settled to annex the 
Kingdom whic h so openly defied his wishes and commands. 
Louis was aware that this would probably be the end of the 
quarrel, for on the 21st September 1809, Napoleon had written 
a letter to him setting forth his many grievances. He charged 
the King with favouring Dutch men who were well disposed 
towards England, with making speeches containing "nothing 
but disagreeable allusions to France," with allowing "the 
relations between Holland and England to be renewed," with 
violating the laws of the blockade which is the only m eans of 
efficaciously injuring this Power," and so on.  
"To sum up," he concluded, "the annexation of Holland 
to France is what would be most useful to France, to Holland, 
and to the Continent, because it is what would be most 
harmful to England. This anne xation could be carried out by 
consent or by force. I have sufficient grievance against 
Holland to declare war; at the same time I am quite ready to 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  112 agree to an arrangement which would yield to me the Rhine as 
a frontier, and by which Holland would emerge to fulfil the 
conditions stipulated above."  
The Emperor began by annexing the island of 
Walcheren. Gradually the encroachments were extended until 
the left bank of the Rhine was wholly French. Troops were 
drafted to Holland, the Dutch bitterly resenting t he 
interference of Napoleon in affairs which they held were no 
concern of his. There was talk of an insurrection, of arming the 
country to resist the arbitrary claims of the despot. Finally the 
unhappy Louis abdicated in favour of his son, and retired to 
the confines of Bohemia. Little more than a week later 
Holland was definitely annexed to the Empire, thereby adding 
nine departments to France. In the following month Jerome 
Bonaparte, King of Westphalia, was offended by the 
appearance of French troops at t he mouths of the Elbe and 
Weser. Indeed, it would appear as if Napoleon was intent upon 
alienating the affection of the members of his own Imperial 
family. Perhaps the most tried brother was Joseph, who 
deserved all pity in the far from enthusiastic recept ion his new 
Spanish subjects were according him. Lucien had long since 
quarrelled with the Emperor, and although the latter attempted 
a reconciliation he was unsuccessful. On obtaining Napoleon's 
permission to retire to America, the ship on which he sailed  
was captured by an English frigate, and for several years he 
lived the life of a country gentleman in the land he had been 
brought up to hate. The hapless Josephine was in retirement at 
Malmaison; Murat failed to see eye to eye with his brother -in-
law, so  much so that later the Emperor threatened to deprive 
him of his throne. In 1810 Napoleon also lost the services and 
support of Bernadotte by his election as Crown Prince of 
Sweden.  
But while his brothers and friends were thus falling 
away from him Napole on felt amply compensated in March 
1811 by the birth of a son, who was given the high -sounding 
title of King of Rome. It will be remembered that Charlemagne, founder of the Holy Roman Empire, was styled 
"King of the Romans." "Glory had never caused him to shed a 
single tear," says Constant, the Emperor's valet, "but the 
happiness of being a father had softened that soul which the 
most brilliant victories and the most sincere tokens of public 
admiration scarcely seemed to touch."  
Supreme in war, Napoleon wa s also one of the greatest 
administrators of whom we have record. As the story of his 
life has progressed we have noted how he set about the 
reformation of the governments of the various countries he had 
conquered or where his word was regarded as law. "Th e 
State—it is I," said Louis XIV., and Napoleon summed up his 
own mode of life on one occasion by quoting the remark, 
which was no mere figure of speech. He seldom took 
recreation; when he was tired of thinking of battalions he 
thought of fleets, or coloni es, or commerce. As Emperor he 
sometimes hunted, but more from a matter of policy than 
because he loved sport, just as he went to Mass to set a good 
example, and to the first act of a new play to gratify public 
curiosity. M. Frederic Masson, the eminent Na poleonic 
historian, is authority for the statement that the Emperor once 
promised to attend a magnificent ball, and the most elaborate 
preparations had been made in his honour. Unfortunately the 
Imperial guest remained closeted with the Minister of Finance  
from eight o'clock in the evening until he heard a clock strike 
and was surprised to find that it was 3 A.M. The so -called 
pleasures of the table were miseries to him, and he ate his food 
with no regard whatever for convention or the menu. He 
would begin with an ice and finish with a viand.  
The Memoirs   of Napoleon's three private secretaries, 
Bourrienne, Meneval, and Fain, afford us intimate views of the 
great man at work. Those of Bourrienne are the least authentic 
because they are not entirely his writ ing. The Emperor had an 
unfortunate habit from his secretary's point of view of 
dictating his correspondence in full, and he spoke at such a 
rate that it was almost impossible to note what he said in its 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  113 entirety. To interrupt him was a breach of etiquette . Fain found 
it necessary to leave blanks, which he filled up when he was 
transcribing with the help of the context.  
M. Masson thus describes the Emperor's work -room at 
the Tuileries: —  
"The room which Napoleon made into his study was of 
moderate size. It  was lighted by a single window made in a 
corner and looking into the garden. The principal piece of 
furniture, placed in the middle, was a magnificent bureau, 
loaded with gilt bronze, and supported by two griffins. The lid 
of the table slided into a groov e, so that it could be shut 
without disarranging the papers. Under the bureau, and 
screwed to the floor, was a sliding cupboard, into which every 
time the Emperor went out was placed a portfolio of which he 
alone had the key. The armchair belonging to the bureau was 
of antique shape; the back was covered with tapestry of green 
kerseymere, the folds of which were fastened by silk cords, 
and the arms finished off with griffins' heads. The Emperor 
scarcely ever sat down in his chair except to give his signatur e. 
He kept habitually at the right of the fireplace, on a small sofa 
covered with green taffeta, near to which was a stand which 
received the correspondence of the day. A screen of several 
leaves kept off the heat of the fire. At the further end of the 
room, at right angles in the corners, were placed four 
bookcases, and between the two which occupied the wall at 
the end was a great regulator clock of the same kind as that 
furnished in 1808 by Bailly for the study at Compiegne, which 
cost 4000 francs. . . .  There were books also in the back study, 
books in the cabinet of the keeper of the portfolio, along the 
side of the bedroom, and books also in the little apartment.  
"Opposite the fireplace, a long closet with glass doors, 
breast high, with a marble top, contained boxes for papers, and 
carried the volumes to be consulted and the documents in use; 
no doubt also the equestrian statuette of Frederick II., which 
the Emperor constantly had under his eyes. This statuette was 
the only work of art which he ever pe rsonally desired to have.  "In the recess of the window was the table of the 
private secretary. The room was furnished with a few chairs. 
At night, to light his bureau, Napoleon used a candlestick with 
two branches, with a great shade of sheet iron of the ordinary 
kind."  
There was also a back study, where the Emperor 
usually received his Ministers of State, a topographic study, 
and two small rooms. From this suite of apartments Napoleon 
may be said to have directed Western Europe.  
Brief mention must be ma de of the Emperor's 
"campaign" library. The volumes were contained in two 
mahogany cases fitted with shelves; each book was noted in a 
miniature catalogue and had its special place, changes being 
made from time to time. Novels, historical memoirs, poetry, 
and the classics were invariably represented. No fewer than six 
chests of volumes were conveyed to Waterloo.  
Meanwhile the rearrangement of Europe, always to the 
advantage of France, continued almost without cessation by 
the addition of a strip of territo ry here, some miles of another 
man's possessions there. Soon every inch of coast line from the 
Rhine to the Elbe was under Napoleon's domination. 
Oldenburg, a Duchy ruled by one of the Czar's relations, was 
swallowed up, the Hanseatic towns and Valais were  
incorporated in the ever -growing Empire. The restoration of 
Polish independence by the Emperor of the French seemed not 
improbable and annoyed the Czar intensely. The latter had 
good ground for thinking that Napoleon contemplated this 
course in the recent  territorial acquisitions of the Duchy of 
Warsaw according to the terms of the Treaty of Schonbrunn. 
When he boldly asked for an assurance that the kingdom of 
Poland should never be re -established, Napoleon politely 
declined, contenting himself with the st atement that he would 
not assist anyone else to do it, thereby leaving a loop hole for 
his own interference should he deem it necessary or desirable.  
Such a reckless, or rather insane, policy made it 
evident that Napoleon no longer intended to share the w orld 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  114 with the Emperor of all the Russias as he had suggested at 
Tilsit and Erfurt. We have already noticed that the Czar had 
entertained suspicions of his friend's loyalty, a doubt 
reciprocated by Napoleon, who was intensely annoyed that 
Russia had not kep t strictly to the terms of the Continental 
System, the relaxation of which was considerably to the 
benefit both of Great Britain and of Russia. Alexander, also, 
had been at war with Turkey, and Napoleon, instead of aiding 
his ally, as the Czar had a certai n amount of right to expect, 
endeavoured to prolong the contest to serve his own personal 
ends. This the Porte, suspecting ulterior motives, refused to do, 
and on the 28th May 1812 peace was restored, to be followed 
in July by peace between Russia and Grea t Britain. Sweden, 
coveting Norway and knowing that no help could be expected 
from France in the fulfilment of her hope, while possibly it 
might be received from Russia, also came to terms with the 
two reconciled Powers after hostile measures had been 
unde rtaken against her by Davout in Pomerania. Preparations 
for war were now made by France and Russia in real earnest. 
Following his usual plan Napoleon made overtures to England 
for a cessation of hostilities. His terms were that the present 
occupants of the  thrones of Spain and Naples should be 
acknowledged by Great Britain and her troops withdrawn from 
their territory. He on his part undertook to recall his armies.  
On the eve of the Emperor's departure for Dresden to 
dazzle and flatter his allies by a fina l display of grandeur 
worthy the Conqueror of Western Europe, Pasquier, his 
newly -appointed Prefect of Police, had an interview with him. 
The question of a shortage in the food supply of Paris had 
come up, and Pasquier had ventured to remark that the 
situa tion would be rendered more dangerous by the monarch's 
absence. "Napoleon appeared struck by these few remarks," 
Pasquier tells us. "When I had ended speaking, he remained 
silent, and pacing to and fro between the window and the 
fireplace, his arms crossed  behind his back, like a man who is 
pondering deeply. I followed in his steps, when, facing me 
suddenly, he uttered the words which follow: 'Yes, there is doubtless some truth in what you tell me; it is one more 
difficulty added to the many I have to face in the greatest, the 
most difficult   undertaking I have ever attempted; but I must 
fain bring to a termination what I have begun. Farewell, 
monsieur le préfet.'"   
On the 9th May 1812, the Emperor and his consort set 
out on their journey to the capital of S axony. It was one long 
series of festivities culminating in a Court of Kings which 
included the Emperor and Empress of Austria, the Kings of 
Prussia, Saxony, Naples, Wurtemburg, and Westphalia, and 
the rulers of Saxe Weimar, Saxe Coburg, and Dessau. "His 
levee," says de Segur, "presented a remarkable sight. 
Sovereign princes waited for an audience from the Conqueror 
of Europe; they were mixed up to such an extent with his 
officers that the latter were frequently on their guard lest they 
should accidentally brush up against these new courtiers and 
be confounded with them." His description may be a little 
exaggerated, but it showed to what a supreme height Napoleon 
had risen, and how marked had been the change in his ideas 
since the days when he would have wil lingly laid down his life 
for Republicanism. At St Helena he stated that at Dresden he 
"appeared as the King of Kings." This was not meant in any 
blasphemous sense, but was merely the Emperor's summing -
up of the unique and all -powerful position he then occ upied. 
The inhabitants of Dresden waited in the streets for hours on 
the chance of getting a fleeting glimpse of the "little great 
man" who had done so much and who was expected to do 
considerably more in the forthcoming campaign. "It was not 
his crown," s ays Count Philip de Segur, "his rank, the luxury 
of his Court, but him —himself—on whom they desired to 
feast their eyes; a memento of his features which they were 
anxious to obtain: they wished to be able to say to their less 
fortunate countrymen and poste rity that they had seen 
Napoleon." Englishmen who had every reason to hate him 
have left behind records which testify to the fascination 
exercised over them by the Emperor on various occasions. The 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  115 Germans had nothing to thank him for, and yet they flocked  in 
crowds to see their oppressor.  
Far from giving way to the fears which he had 
confessed to Pasquier, the Emperor made light of the many 
difficulties which he knew to be insuperable to the task he had 
undertaken. To the Abbe de Pradt, Archbishop of Mali nes, 
whom he sent as envoy to Warsaw, he remarked, "I will 
destroy Russian influence in Europe. Two battles will do the 
business; the Emperor Alexander will come on his knees, and 
Russia shall be disarmed. Spain costs me very dear: without 
that I should be  master of the world; but when I become such, 
my son will have nothing to do but to retain my place."  
"Never was the success of an expedition more certain;" 
he assured his vassals, "I see on all sides nothing but 
probabilities in my favour. Not only do I advance at the head 
of the immense forces of France, Italy, Germany, the 
Confederation of the Rhine, and Poland, but the two 
monarchies which have hitherto been the most powerful 
auxiliaries of Russia against me, have now ranged themselves 
on my side: they  espouse my quarrel with the zeal of my 
oldest friends." This was not strictly true, and savoured rather 
too much of his army bulletins and similar proclamations. Like 
the doctor with a nervous patient, he withheld some of the 
disagreeable features of the case. "The two monarchies," 
namely Austria and Prussia, had they dared, would have 
preferred to remain neutral, or if that were impossible, to come 
to terms with Russia, their last resource on the Continent 
against the aggressor who had treated them with s uch scant 
consideration. Prussia had "espoused" Napoleon's quarrel so 
far as to entertain hopes but a few months before of an alliance 
with either Russia or Austria.  
The campaign of 1812 was to dwarf all Napoleon's 
previous efforts in magnitude; a mere su mming -up of statistics 
can at most give but an inadequate idea of the immense 
armament which he deemed necessary if a death -blow was to 
be struck at the heart of the great Russian Empire. The flames of the Peninsular war were still flickering, which necess itated 
the locking -up of a large number of troops under Soult, 
Marmont and Suchet which Napoleon could have used to 
better purpose had affairs been more settled in that quarter. 
France was in very truth "a nation in arms." For home defence 
the able -bodied men from twenty -five to sixty years of age 
were divided into three classes, 900,000 of whom were to 
garrison the fortresses on the frontiers and watch the coasts, 
the remaining 300,000) ?> to drill and make themselves 
efficient for immediate service whenev er necessary. A rich 
man considered himself fortunate if he could secure a 
substitute for less than 8000 francs. The price of the Emperor's 
friendship was also a costly one to those Princes whom he 
deigned to favour with his attentions. The Confederation o f the 
Rhine was called upon to furnish 147,000 men, Italy some 
80,000, Poland 60,000. France contributed 200,000 strong, 
other countries brought the total to the stupendous figure of 
680,000 troops. Prussia found herself called upon to furnish 
20,000 troop s for the invasion of the Czar's territory, and 
enormous quantities of oats, rice, wheat, and other provisions, 
in addition to hospital accommodation, horses and carriages. 
Austria was to supply 30,000 soldiers, but she did so on the 
distinct understanding  that her Polish provinces should be kept 
inviolate. Prussia asked nothing and expected nothing.  
Napoleon's new army was one of the most 
cosmopolitan that ever came into being. There were French, 
Austrians, Prussians, Bavarians, Poles, Italians, Illyrians , 
Dutch, Swiss, even a sprinkling of Spaniards and Portuguese. 
These men did not all follow willingly. Indeed in 1811 no 
fewer than 80,000 French conscripts deserted or failed to 
answer the summons. A string of manacled recruits was not an 
uncommon sight i n France. Napoleon was now "the common 
oppressor," the gold of glory had turned out to be tinsel.  
While France was deploring, Napoleon was organizing 
his forces. He brooked no delay, would listen to no arguments, 
was deaf to the entreaties of those who fa iled to see his reason 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  116 for making war with Russia. "The Emperor is mad, quite 
mad," Admiral Decres confided to a friend. "He will ruin us 
all, many as we are, and everything will end in a frightful 
catastrophe." Mad with ambition he certainly was, mad in 
intellect he certainly was not.  
The army was divided into ten great corps. The first 
under Davout, the second under Oudinot, the third under Ney; 
the fourth was an Army of Observation, under Prince Eugene; 
the fifth consisted of Poles under Prince Poniatov ski; the sixth, 
in which the Bavarians were included, under Saint -Cyr; the 
seventh, made up of the troops from Saxony, under Reynier; 
the eighth, of Westphalians under Vandamme, to be succeeded 
by Junot; the ninth was given to Victor, the tenth to 
Macdonal d. An eleventh Army Corps under Augereau was 
afterwards created, largely augmented from the ninth. There 
were also the Austrians commanded by Prince Schwarzenberg, 
the Imperial Guard, and four divisions of Cavalry under Murat 
and Latour -Maubourg.  
To oppos e such a formidable host the Czar finally 
mustered some 400,000 troops. At the opening of the 
campaign he had considerably fewer men at his disposal than 
Napoleon. They were divided into three main armies. The first 
Army of the West, under Barclay de Tolly , numbered 136,000; 
the second Army of the West, commanded by Prince 
Bagration, totaled 39,000; the third, or reserve, under General 
Tormassoff, reached some 40,000. Other troops, drawn from 
various places, swelled the initial number to perhaps 250,000. 
As there is considerable discrepancy in the figures given by 
the most reliable authorities probably the exact military 
strength of the two nations will never be known.  CHAPTER XXVIII  
THE RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN  
(1812)  
Poland was the point of concentration, and th ither the 
Grand Army was marching. On the 11th June 1812, the 
Emperor arrived at Dantzig, which had been turned into a vast 
military depot, and on the following morning proceeded to 
Konigsberg, where further supplies were stored. He spent the 
whole day and  night dictating despatches. Having twice 
communicated with the Czar to no effect, he was now 
irrevocably committed to the campaign. At Vilkowyski 
Napoleon took the opportunity to issue a bulletin to his troops 
couched in the old style which had proved so effectual in 
former campaigns. It is as follows:  
"Soldiers! The second Polish war is begun. The first 
terminated at Friedland and at Tilsit. At Tilsit, Russia vowed 
an eternal alliance with France, and war with England. She 
now breaks her vows, and refuse s to give any explanation of 
her strange conduct until the French eagles have repassed the 
Rhine and left our allies at her mercy.  
"Fate drags her on —let her destinies be fulfilled. Does 
she imagine we are degenerated? Are we no longer the 
soldiers who fo ught at Austerlitz? We are placed between 
dishonour and war; our choice cannot be doubtful. Let us then 
march forward. Let us cross the Niemen, and carry the war 
into her own territory. This second Polish war will be as 
glorious for the French arms as the first; but the peace we shall 
conclude will carry with it its own guarantee, and will 
terminate the fatal influence which Russia, for fifty years past, 
has exercised in the affairs of Europe."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  117 Alexander's proclamation to his troops, while less 
forceful th an Napoleon's, is more dignified and restrained. It 
was issued from his headquarters at Vilna, the capital of 
Lithuania, on the 25th June 1812, two days later than the one 
given above.  
"We had long observed," it runs, "on the part of the 
Emperor of the Fr ench, the most hostile proceedings towards 
Russia; but we always hoped to avert them by conciliatory and 
pacific measures. At length, experiencing a continued renewal 
of direct and evident aggression, notwithstanding our earnest 
desire to maintain peace, w e were compelled to complete and 
to assemble our armies. But even then, we flattered ourselves 
that a reconciliation might take place while we remained on 
the frontiers of our empire, and, without violating one 
principle of peace, were prepared only to act  in our own 
defence. . . . The Emperor of the French, by suddenly 
attacking our army at Kovno, has been the first to declare war. 
As nothing, therefore, can inspire him with those friendly 
sentiments which possessed our bosoms, we have no choice 
but to opp ose our forces to those of the enemy, invoking the 
aid of the Almighty, the Witness and Defender of the truth. It 
is unnecessary for me to remind the generals, officers, and 
soldiers of their duty, to excite their valour; the blood of the 
brave Slavonians flows in their veins. Warriors! you defend 
your religion, your country, and your liberty. I am with you: 
God is against the aggressor." Alexander promised the 
Governor of St Petersburg that he would not sheath his sword 
"so long as a single enemy remains i n Russian territory."  
Practically the whole of the Grand Army —an effective 
force at the beginning of the campaign of 400,000 troops —
crossed the river Niemen at different points, the troops with 
the Emperor near Kovno, those of Eugene and King Jerome at 
Pilony and Grodno respectively, the remainder under 
Macdonald at Tilsit. Prince Schwarzenberg with the Austrians 
crossed by the River Bug. Davout's corps secured the honour 
of being first to enter Russian territory, and without much trouble they secured poss ession of the little town of Kovno, 
the point of concentration, reference to which is made in the 
Czar's proclamation.  
Alison has painted the scene for us in glowing colours. 
"The tent of the Emperor," he writes, "was placed on an 
eminence three hundred p aces from the bank, and as the sun 
rose he beheld the resplendent mass slowly descending to the 
bridges. The world had never seen so magnificent an array as 
lay before him; horse, foot, and cannon in the finest order, and 
in the highest state of equipment,  incessantly issued from the 
forest, and wound down the paths which led to the river: the 
glittering of the arms, the splendour of the dress, the loud 
shouts of the men as they passed the Imperial station, inspired 
universal enthusiasm and seemed to afford  a certain presage of 
success. The burning impatience of the conscripts; the calm 
assurance of the veteran soldiers; the confident ardour of the 
younger officers; the dubious presentiments of the older 
generals, filled every breast with thrilling emotion. The former 
were impatient for the campaign as the commencement of 
glory and fortune; the latter dreaded it as the termination of 
ease and opulence. None entered on it without anxiety and 
interest. No sinister presentiments were now visible on the 
countenan ce of the Emperor; the joy which he felt at the 
recommencement of war communicated a universal degree of 
animation. Two hundred thousand men, including forty 
thousand horse, of whom twelve thousand were cuirassiers, 
cased in glittering steel, passed the ri ver that day in presence 
of the Emperor. Could the eye of prophecy have foreseen the 
thin and shattered remains of this immense host, which a few 
months afterwards were alone destined to regain the shore of 
the Niemen, the change would have appeared too dr eadful for 
any human powers of destruction to have accomplished."  
The passage of the fourth Army Corps was not made 
under such happy auspices, but the men were cheered by the 
news that on the 28th June Napoleon had entered Vilna. This 
enabled them to shak e off to some extent the depressing 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  118 effects of the wet weather, and the presence of Eugene, 
Viceroy of Italy, and the dauntless Junot, both of whom 
personally superintended the construction of the bridge, did 
much to inspire enthusiasm. There was no enemy to contest 
them, and the crossing was effected in good order.  
"Scarcely had we reached the opposite shore," says 
Captain Eugene Labaume, who was with the expedition, 
"when we seemed to breathe a new air. However, the roads 
were dreadfully bad, the forests  gloomy, and the villages 
completely deserted; but imagination, inflamed by a spirit of 
conquest, was enchanted with everything, and cherished 
illusions which were but too soon destroyed.  
"In fact, our short stay at Pilony, in the midst of a 
tempestuous r ain, was marked by such extraordinary disasters, 
that any man, without being superstitious, would have 
regarded them as the presage of future misfortunes. In this 
wretched village, the Viceroy himself had no house to shelter 
him; and we were heaped upon on e another under wretched 
sheds, or else exposed to all the inclemencies of the weather. 
An extreme scarcity made us anticipate the horrors of famine. 
The rain fell in torrents, and overwhelmed both men and 
horses; the former escaped, but the badness of the  roads 
completed the destruction of the latter. They were seen 
dropping by hundreds in the environs of Pilony; the road was 
covered with dead horses, overturned waggons and scattered 
baggage. It was in the month of July that we suffered thus 
from cold, and  rain, and hunger. So many calamities excited 
within us sad forebodings of the future, and everyone began to 
dread the event of an enterprise, the commencement of which 
was so disastrous; but the sun reappeared on the horizon, the 
clouds dispersed, our fea rs were scattered with them, and at 
that moment we thought that the fine season would last for 
ever."  
The captain's narrative is replete with similar instances, 
showing the almost complete failure of the commissariat on 
which so much care and anxiety had been bestowed, the treacherous nature of the weather, and the impossibility in so 
barren a country of putting into effect Napoleon's maxim that 
war should support itself. Indeed, the truth was shown of 
another of the Emperor's principles, that "an army mar ches on 
its stomach." In the paragraph immediately following the one 
quoted above, Labaume says that on entering Kroni the 
soldiers again found the houses deserted, "which convinced us 
that the enemy, in order to ruin the country through which we 
were to p ass, and deprive us of all the means of subsistence, 
had carried along with them the inhabitants and the cattle." In 
a march of fifty miles no fewer than 10,000 horses succumbed.  
But a greater difficulty than those we have enumerated 
soon presented itself . The Russian army, like a will -o'-the-
wisp, enticed the French further and further from their base by 
a series of retreats which made it impossible for Napoleon to 
fall on the enemy with the fierce rapidity characteristic of his 
method of warfare. Alexand er was playing a waiting game. 
When the ranks of the enemy were thinned by death, sickness, 
and desertion, when want and privation stalked hand in hand 
with the French armies as they painfully made their way along 
the snow -covered ruts —then would be the ti me to strike. The 
Czar could afford to wait, his antagonist could not; one was on 
the defensive, the other on the offensive, and many hundreds 
of miles from the capital of his unwieldly Empire. There was 
little or no opportunity for the soldiers to pay unw elcome 
attentions to the inhabitants of the villages through which they 
passed. The peasants had forsaken their wretched wooden 
shanties, the furniture of the houses of many of the nobles had 
been removed, making the places almost as cheerless as the 
frown ing forests where their former owners had sought refuge.  
At Vilna, which the Russians had evacuated, Napoleon 
experienced none of these troubles. The Poles, longing to 
restore the independence of their beloved country, regarded 
him as their potential libe rator, delivering to him the keys of 
the town, donning their national costumes, and indulging in 
merry -making. The ancient capital of Lithuania awoke from 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  119 her long sleep. Deputation after deputation waited on the 
Emperor, hungering to hear the words which would give them 
back their lost freedom. They were never uttered; he dare not 
break faith with his allies at this juncture. He made vague 
promises in order to stimulate their enthusiasm, set up a 
provisional government, and began to reorganize the province s 
with his usual insight, but further than this he would not go. 
The Poles repaid him well by immediately ordering some 
12,000 men to be placed at the Emperor's disposal, and from 
first to last they furnished no fewer than 85,000 troops. To the 
Diet (Parli ament) of Warsaw he admitted that he could 
sanction no movement which might endanger the peaceable 
possession of Austria's Polish provinces, but he issued a fiery 
proclamation to those who were serving with the Russian 
colours. It runs:  
"Poles! You are un der Russian banners. It was 
permitted you to serve that Power while you had no longer a 
country of your own; but all that is now changed; Poland is 
created anew. You must fight for her complete re -
establishment, and compel the Russians to acknowledge those  
rights of which you have been despoiled by injustice and 
usurpation. The General Confederation of Poland and 
Lithuania recalls every Pole from the Russian service. 
Generals of Poland, officers and soldiers, listen to the voice of 
your country; abandon the  standard of your oppressors; hasten 
to range yourselves under the eagles of the Jagellons, the 
Casimirs, and the Sobieskis! [Former kings of Poland] Your 
country requires it of you; honour and religion equally 
command it."  
Note the subtle phrase, "Poland  is created anew." It is 
delightfully vague, meaning little, yet conveying much, and 
probably understood by many to promise the longed -for 
restoration.  
Napoleon did not leave Vilna, where he had stopped 
much too long, until the 16th July, but the troops u nder King 
Jerome and Davout had been busy in an endeavour to cut off Prince Bagration from the main army under Barclay de Tolly. 
This measure was far from successful. Jerome was too slow in 
his movements, two combats ensued in which the Russians 
were succe ssful, and Bagration made good his retreat to 
Bobruisk, Barclay falling back on Drissa, where a strongly 
entrenched camp was in course of construction, and later to 
Vitebsk. Napoleon was furious at his brother's failure, saying, 
"It is impossible to manoeu vre worse than he has done," and 
superseding him by the more energetic Davout. With the 
intention of fighting Barclay, Napoleon pushed on to 
Glubokoie, only to find that the enemy had proceeded to 
Vitebsk, which in turn had been evacuated for Smolensk, 
where Bagration joined hands with Barclay on the 2nd August. 
Some advantages had been gained by Murat, Macdonald, and 
Oudinot, but the great opportunity of defeating the two armies 
separately had been lost, and the combined forces now 
numbered some 120,000 tr oops. The Emperor had again 
wasted time from various causes at Vitebsk, which centre 
several of his officers wished to make the winter -quarters of 
the army. He had already lost 100,000 men without 
accomplishing anything of importance, and as he himself 
admitted, "Russia is too powerful to yield without fighting: 
Alexander will not treat till a great battle has been fought." 
The Emperor was for pushing on, and would brook no 
interference. "Why should we remain here eight months," he 
asked his generals when t he subject was under discussion, 
"when twenty days are sufficient to accomplish our purpose? 
Let us anticipate Winter and its reflections. We must strike 
soon and strongly, or we shall be in danger. We must be in 
Moscow in a month, or we shall never be the re. Peace awaits 
us under its walls. Should Alexander still persist, I will treat 
with his nobles: Moscow hates St Petersburg; the effects of 
that jealousy are incalculable."  
Spurred on by the defeat of the advanced guard under 
Murat, the Emperor now deci ded to attack Smolensk with 
practically his entire army. According to Chambray this was 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  120 now reduced, excluding various detachments, to some 194,000 
men.  
 
 
 
NAPOLEO N AMID  THE RUINS  OF SMOLENSK .  
On the 16th August Ney, with all his old fire and 
vigour, attempted to storm the citadel and was repulsed. 
Following their former plan, and fearing to be cut off from 
Moscow, part of the Russian army under Bagration began to  
retreat in the early hours of the following morning, Barclay 
remaining to defend the town with about 30,000 troops. After much heavy fighting the Emperor was in possession of the 
suburbs, but the losses on either side had been severe. Very 
soon the dense masses of smoke which arose from the walled 
city made it evident that to the terrors of shot and shell had 
been added that of fire. Flames burst out in all directions, the 
wooden roofs of the smaller houses quickly fell in, larger 
buildings caught alight a nd blazed away, fanned by the breeze. 
Within a few hours Smolensk was little more than a 
smouldering charnel -house. The conclusion of this dreadful 
incident is best told by an eye witness, an officer in the French 
army.  
"At one o'clock the ruins of the to wn were abandoned," 
he says. "Our first grenadiers prepared to mount the breach at 
two o'clock in the morning, when, approaching without 
opposition, they discovered that the place was entirely 
evacuated. We took possession of it, and found on the walls 
many pieces of cannon which the enemy could not take away.  
"Never," the narrator adds, "can you form an adequate 
idea of the dreadful scene which the interior of Smolensk 
presented to my view, and never during the whole course of 
my life can I forget it. Eve ry street, every square, was covered 
with the bodies of the Russians, dead and dying, while the 
flames shed over them a horrible glare."  
Labaume thus continues the dreadful story begun by 
his friend:  
"The next day (August 19th) we entered Smolensk by 
the suburb built along the river. In every direction we marched 
over scattered ruins and dead bodies. Palaces yet burning 
offered to our sight only walls half destroyed by the flames, 
and, thick among the fragments were the blackened carcases of 
the wretched inhabitants whom the fire had consumed. The 
few houses that remained were completely filled by the 
soldiery, while at the doors stood the miserable proprietors 
without an asylum, deploring the death of their children, and 
the loss of their property. The ch urches alone afforded some 
consolation to the unhappy victims who had no other shelter. 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  121 The cathedral, celebrated through Europe, and held in great 
veneration by the Russians, became the refuge of the 
unfortunate beings who had escaped the flames. In this church 
and round its altars, were to be seen whole families extended 
on the ground; in one place was an old man just expiring, and 
casting a look on the image of the saint whom he had all his 
life invoked; in another an infant whose feeble cry the mother, 
worn down with grief, was endeavouring to hush. . . . In the 
midst of this desolation, the passage of the army into the 
interior of the town formed a striking contrast. On one side 
was seen the abject submission of the conquered —on the 
other, the pride att endant upon victory; the former had lost 
their all—the latter, rich with spoil, and ignorant of defeat, 
marched proudly to the sound of warlike music, inspiring the 
unhappy remains of a vanquished population with mingled 
fear and admiration."  
Again the Em peror pondered, apparently undecided as 
to his next movement. Should he take up his winter quarters at 
Smolensk, as he had originally intended, or push on to 
Moscow? A great battle had been fought and yet the situation 
remained unchanged. He had merely tak en a ruined city! Ney, 
Grouchy, and Murat, who had followed the retreating 
Russians, had but sorry tales to tell on the 19th, and the action 
near Valutino on that day was indecisive largely owing to the 
hesitation of Junot in coming to the aid of Ney. Defe at and 
disaster alone seemed to attend the efforts of the Grand Army. 
Still Napoleon hesitated. How could he, the virtual Master of 
Europe, the Conqueror who never failed, quietly lay aside his 
sword and by so doing tacitly admit failure? No, ten thousand 
times no; he would push towards Moscow though the heavens 
fall!  CHAPTER XXIX  
THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY INTO MOSCOW—AND 
AFTER  
(1812)  
Grumbling was not confined to the French army in the 
campaign of 1812. The Russian troops said hard things of their 
generals whi ch were not always justifiable, and the patriotic 
sentiments of the nobles suffered somewhat by the continued 
retreats, which were taken as evidence of weakness. As a 
concession to public opinion the much maligned Barclay was 
superseded by Kutusov, the Rus sian Commander -in-chief at 
Austerlitz, an old man approaching seventy years of age who 
had but recently returned from the war which his country had 
been waging with Turkey. He was to have an opportunity of 
showing his prowess within a few days of his joini ng the 
army, which now comprised nearly 104,000 men to the 
125,000 or so of Napoleon. Severe fighting occurred on the 
5th September, a redoubt near the village of Shevardino being 
taken and retaken three times by the advance guard before the 
Russians final ly withdrew. So great was the bloodshed that 
when the Emperor afterwards asked where a certain battalion 
was, he received the reply, "In the redoubt, sire," every 
individual having lost his life in the desperate assault. Over 
1000 men on either side perish ed in defending or storming this 
position.  
The enemy had fallen back on Borodino, a name which 
will be always associated with one of the most terrible battles 
ever fought on European soil. As the sun rose on the 7th 
September Napoleon exclaimed, "It is th e sun of Austerlitz!" 
and shortly afterwards issued the following proclamation, 
which aroused some of the old enthusiasm amongst his troops 
but failed to invoke the plaudits of all. It is short and shows 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  122 that the Emperor attached more importance to the bat tles of 
Vitebsk and Smolensk than the facts warranted:  
"Soldiers! The battle is at hand which you have so long 
desired. Henceforth the victory depends on yourselves. It has 
become necessary, and will give you abundance; good winter 
quarters, and a speedy return to your country! Conduct 
yourselves as you did at Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and 
Smolensk. Let the remotest posterity recount your actions on 
this day. Let your countrymen say of you all, 'He was in that 
great battle under the walls of Moscow!' "  
Firing began at six o'clock, and continued for twelve 
anxious hours. The contestants disputed the ground with such 
determination, each carrying and losing positions again and 
again, that at times it was difficult to say which army had the 
advantage. Acc ording to Labaume thirty of the Emperor's 
generals were wounded, including Davout and Rapp, the 
former by being thrown from his horse as it fell dead, the latter 
by a ball which struck him on the hip. General Augustus de 
Caulaincourt, brother of the more c elebrated Armand de 
Caulaincourt, Duke of Vicenza, after performing prodigies of 
valour in the Russian entrenchments, where the hardest 
fighting was done, was killed, as was General Montbrun but a 
little time before, while leading a similar attack. Prince 
Bagration afterwards died of the injuries he received, and 
many other Russian generals were more or less seriously 
wounded.  
The key of the position, the Russian entrenched 
battery, with its terrible heap of dead and dying, was at last 
captured by the Fren ch. The officer commanding it was about 
to throw himself on his sword rather than surrender, but was 
prevented in the nick of time by the victors, who took him 
prisoner.  
As Napoleon and his staff were surveying the field 
after the battle his horse stepped  on a wounded man, whose 
groans attracted the rider's attention. "It is only a Russian," one 
of his attendants said, probably to allay Napoleon's feelings rather than from want of sympathy. "After victory," the 
Emperor retorted, "there are no enemies, but only men." He 
was neither callous nor did he love war for its own sake. It was 
the result that pleased him, the humbling of the enemy, the 
addition of territory to the Empire, the driving of one more 
nail in England's coffin. The maimed were ever his first  care 
after battle. His besetting sin was an abnormal, and 
consequently unhealthy, ambition —the vice at which he had 
railed so much in his early days.  
Napoleon failed to use his 20,000 Guards at Borodino, 
why is still a matter of conjecture. Some writers maintain that 
it would have been foolish for him to use up his last reserves, 
others hold that had he flung them into the battle he might 
have annihilated the Russian army and saved himself the 
agonies which followed. The reason he gave was, "At 800 
league s from Paris one must not risk one's last reserve." on the 
invasion of Russia in 1812, states that Borodino was a 
butchery which cost the contestants not less than 70,000 men 
in killed and wounded. "No battle of modern times," he says in 
summing up, "no en counter since the days before gunpowder, 
when the beaten side could be cut down ad libitum   by the 
victors and quarter was seldom given, has witnessed such 
awful slaughter. . . . Whether it can be fairly called useless 
may be doubted, except to the nominal  conqueror. Napoleon 
certainly deserves that title: the enemy had been dislodged 
from their position, and, as it proved, left the way open to 
Moscow. So much he might have attained by maneuvering; 
more he could not attain unless the courage of his enemies 
gave way. Without the brave men who fell at Borodino 
Napoleon could not possibly attempt any further offensive 
movement, when his occupation of Moscow led to no 
overtures for peace. Without them, he was substantially 
inferior in force when at length the in evitable retreat began. 
The Russian Te Deums, chanted for the victory that Kutusoff 
falsely claimed, were in truth only premature."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  123 Holy Moscow was to be the city of abundance, its 
entry the herald of a happier order of things. On the 14th 
September, as N apoleon rode forward with his troops, its 
domes and minarets burst upon his view. Segur says that the 
soldiers shouted "Moscow! Moscow!" with the eagerness of 
sailors on sighting land after a long and tedious voyage. The 
city looked more like a mirage than  the home of a quarter of a 
million people, more like the deserted city of an extinct race 
than a hive of humanity. General Sebastiani, who led the 
vanguard, knew the secret, and so did Murat. The Russians 
had arranged a hasty armistice in order to evacuat e the place, 
leaving behind them only the riff -raff, the wounded, the aged, 
and the aliens.  
 
 
 
AFTER  MOSCOW : 'ADVANCE  OR RETREAT ?'  
No clang of bells greeted the  Conqueror as he made his 
triumphal entry, no crowds of men and women craned their 
necks to get a glimpse of the mighty Emperor. Only 
undesirables welcomed him, the unrepentant prodigal son and 
the convict, released from prison by the governor before the 
last inhabitants fled in the wake of the retreating Russian army. There stood the mammoth Kremlin, the Acropolis of the 
ancient capital, surrounded by its massive walls; the gorgeous 
Cathedral of the Assumption in which the Czars were 
crowned; the Great Pal ace begun but six years before, and 
churches innumerable. Ikons but no worshippers, palaces but 
no courtiers! The Emperor took up his quarters in the Kremlin, 
appointing Mortier governor with strict instructions to prevent 
the troops from plundering. We sh all see how the orders were 
obeyed later. Suddenly tongues of flame shot up from different 
quarters of the city, to be extinguished by the troops with great 
difficulty. Then a large public building was discovered to be 
alight. The flames began to spread wi th alarming and all -
devouring rapidity. Soon a portion of the Kremlin itself was in 
imminent danger, and as there was much gunpowder stored in 
the fortress -palace the Emperor was forced to retire to a 
chateau some distance away, to return two days later wh en the 
work of destruction had somewhat abated. Labaume witnessed 
many terrible scenes, which he thus records with his usual 
vivacity:  
"As I advanced towards the fire, the avenues were 
more obstructed by soldiers and beggars carrying off goods of 
every ki nd. The less precious articles were despised, and soon 
thrown away, and the streets were covered with merchandise 
of every description. I penetrated at length into the interior of 
the Exchange; but, alas! it was no more the building so 
renowned for its mag nificence; it was rather a vast furnace, 
from every side of which the burning rafters were continually 
falling, and threatening us with instant destruction. I could 
still, however, proceed with some degree of safety under 
piazzas lined with warehouses whic h the soldiers had broken 
open; every chest was rifled, and the spoil exceeded their most 
sanguine expectations. No cry, no tumult was heard in this 
scene of horror; everyone found enough to satisfy his most 
ardent thirst for plunder. Nothing was heard but  the crackling 
of flames, the noise of doors that were broken open, and 
occasionally a dreadful crash caused by the falling in of some 
vault. Cottons, muslins, and all the most costly productions of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  124 Europe and of Asia, were a prey to the flames. The cellar s 
were filled with sugar, oil, and vitriol; these burning all at once 
in the subterraneous warehouses, sent forth torrents of flame 
through thick iron grates, and presented a dreadful spectacle. It 
was terrible and affecting; even the most hardened minds 
acknowledged the conviction that so great a calamity would, 
on some future day, call forth the vengeance of the Almighty 
upon the authors of such crimes."  
The fire began on the 14th September, and on the 16th 
it was raging worse than ever. "The most heart -rending scene 
which my imagination had ever conceived," adds the narrator, 
"now presented itself to my eyes. A great part of the 
population of Moscow, terrified at our arrival, had concealed 
themselves in cellars or secret recesses of their houses. As the 
fire spread around, we saw them rushing in despair from their 
various asylums. They uttered no imprecation, they breathed 
no complaint; fear had rendered them dumb: and hastily 
snatching up their precious effects, they fled before the flames. 
Others, of gr eater sensibility, and actuated by the genuine 
feelings of nature, saved only their parents, or their infants, 
who were closely clasped in their arms. They were followed 
by their other children, running as fast as their little strength 
would permit, and wi th all the wildness of childish terror, 
vociferating the beloved name of mother. The old people, 
borne down by grief more than by age, had not sufficient 
power to follow their families, but expired near the houses in 
which they were born. The streets, the public places, and the 
churches were filled with these unhappy people, who, lying on 
the remains of their property, suffered even without a murmur. 
No cry, no complaint was heard. Both the conqueror and the 
conquered were equally hardened; the one by exces s of 
fortune, the other by excess of misery."  
Many contemporary writers, including Labaume, assert 
that the conflagration was the deliberate work of patriotic 
citizens headed by Count Rostopchin, governor of Moscow. 
The latter certainly spoke of such a pr oject, and according to the twenty -fifth bulletin of the Grand Army three hundred 
incendiaries provided with appliances for setting fire to the 
wooden houses were arrested and shot. As the Count 
afterwards denied the story it is difficult to say whether he  
actually carried into practice what he preached; it is quite 
possible that some of those who were left behind had actually 
more to do with the affair than the supposed prime mover. 
Professor Eugen Stschepkin, of the Imperial University of 
Odessa, says tha t "Moscow was burnt neither by Napoleon nor 
by Count Rostopchin. Probably, the fire was in part accidental, 
and due to plunderers, both Russian and French; in part the 
deliberate work of patriotically -minded inhabitants." The 
conclusions of Mr Hereford B. George are: "On the face of the 
undoubted facts there is no adequate evidence that the burning 
of Moscow was deliberate, though there is of course no 
evidence that it was not."  
Napoleon now hoped that Alexander would negotiate 
with him for peace. The unex pected happened; the Czar 
showed the most determined resolution. He realised that the 
entry into Moscow would have smaller effects upon the final 
results of the campaign than the twin evils of winter and 
famine which must necessarily follow unless what rem ained of 
the Grand Army beat a speedy retreat. As for his own troops, 
they were constantly reinforced, and had the additional 
advantage of being hardened to the severe climate and the 
peculiar nature of the country. Moreover many of the peasants, 
following  the example of the Tyrolese and the Spaniards, 
waged a savage guerrilla warfare whenever they had an 
opportunity.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  125 CHAPTER XXX  
THE MARCH OF HUMILIATION  
(1812)  
For several weeks the Emperor remained in Moscow 
anxiously awaiting what he hoped would be a fa vourable 
answer to his proposals to Alexander. "I am blamed," he said, 
according to Segur, "for not retreating; but those who censure 
me do not consider that it requires a month to reorganize the 
army and evacuate the hospitals; that, if we abandon the 
wounded, the Cossacks will daily triumph over the sick and 
the isolated men. A retreat will appear a flight; and Europe 
will re -echo with the news. What a frightful course of perilous 
wars will date from my first retrograde step! I knew well that 
Moscow, as a  military position, is worth nothing; but as a 
political point its preservation is of inestimable value. The 
world regards me only as a general, forgetting that I am an 
Emperor. In politics, you must never retrace your steps: if you 
have committed a fault,  you must never show that you are 
conscious of it; error, steadily adhered to, becomes a virtue in 
the eyes of posterity."  
The Czar refusing to treat with the enemy at Moscow, 
Napoleon offered in his desperation to withdraw his 
opposition to Russian plans  regarding Constantinople, hitherto 
the cause of so much bitterness —all to no purpose. Alexander 
remained as adamant, and having previously told Sir Robert 
Wilson, the British commissioner, that he would sooner dig 
potatoes in Siberia than negotiate while a French soldier 
remained in Russian territory, neither went back on his word 
nor regretted it. European affairs were far too unsettled for 
Napoleon to take up winter quarters. There was no alternative 
but to order a retreat, to "pocket his pride," as scho olboys say. 
So the march which he knew must humiliate him in the sight of both his allies and his enemies was begun with what speed 
was possible in the circumstances.  
Gallant and gay they marched along,  
Fair Russia to subdue.  
Sneaking and sad they back r eturn,  
While brave Cossacks pursue.  
 
Cossacks in clouds, and crows and kites,  
Surround them as they go,  
And when they fall and sink in death,  
Their winding sheet is snow.  
Thus run two stanzas of a poem written in the manner 
of the famous John Gilpin   and published in London. If it is 
not particularly good poetry it is true history. At first Napoleon 
hoped by marching southward to find territory less devastated 
and poverty -stricken than that through which he had passed. In 
this he was frustrated by a conf lict which took place between 
Eugene's corps and the army under Kutusoff. The Viceroy of 
Italy captured Malojaroslavetz only to find that he had won  a 
barren victory at extreme cost, leaving the Russians posted 
securely on the hills at the back of the ruin ed town. The 
Emperor had wished to push on; the enemy's position 
prevented it. Had he known that Kutusoff had previously 
arranged to retreat if he were attacked, Napoleon would not 
have hesitated. He weighed the matter in his own mind and 
discussed it with  his Marshals, finally coming to the 
conclusion that his army must of necessity retire by the road 
along which it had advanced, or in the expressive terms of 
Labaume, via "the desert which we ourselves had made."  
Werestchagin's picture of the retreat conv eys some idea 
of the tragedy. There is the stern and unbending Emperor 
wearing the crown of fir cones which he wore at this time, and 
followed by his dejected staff and the empty carriage. We can 
almost hear the crunch of the snow as it powders under foot,  
catch the low murmurings of the disillusioned men as they 
trudge along the uneven roadway, and feel the icy grip and 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  126 stinging smart of the cruel wind. And yet the artist's 
conception, vivid beyond question, cannot bring home to us a 
tithe of the terrors a nd misery of that awful march. Horses 
stumbled and perished, men fell by the wayside and died of 
hunger and cold, some flung away their arms in sheer despair, 
others tramped on like machines, cognizant only of the bitter 
blast which froze their moustaches and whistled through their 
tattered garments.  
 
 
 
THE RETREAT  FROM  MOSCOW .  
According to Labaume, the first snow fell on the 6th 
November, when the army was tramp ing towards Smolensk 
comforted by the thought that in three days they would reach 
their destination and secure some kind of rude shelter, "when 
suddenly the atmosphere, which had hitherto been brilliant, 
was clouded by cold and dense vapours. The sun, enve loped 
by the thickest mists, disappeared from our sight, and the snow 
falling in large flakes, in an instant obscured the day, and 
confounded the earth with the sky. The wind, furiously 
blowing, howled dreadfully through the forests, and 
overwhelmed the fi rs already bent down with the ice; while 
the country around, as far as the eye could reach, presented 
unbroken one white and savage appearance.  "The soldiers, vainly struggling with the snow and the 
wind, that rushed upon them with tempestuous violence, c ould 
no longer distinguish the road; and falling into the ditches 
which bordered it, there found a grave. Others pressed on their 
journey, though scarcely able to drag themselves along. They 
were badly mounted, badly clothed, with nothing to eat, 
nothing t o drink, shivering with cold, and groaning with pain. 
Becoming selfish through despair, they afforded neither 
succour nor even one glance of pity to those who, exhausted 
by fatigue and disease, expired around them. On that dreadful 
day, how many unfortunat e beings, perishing by cold and 
famine, struggled hard with the agonies of death! We heard 
some of them faintly bidding adieu to their friends and 
comrades. Others, as they drew their last breath, pronounced 
the name of their mothers, their wives, their na tive country, 
which they were never more to see; the rigour of the frost 
seized on their benumbed limbs, and penetrated through their 
whole frame. Stretched on the road, we could distinguish only 
the heaps of snow that covered them, and which, at almost 
every step, formed little undulations, like so many graves. At 
the same time vast flights of ravens, abandoning the plain to 
take refuge in the neighbouring forests, croaked ominously as 
they passed over our heads; and troops of dogs, which had 
followed us f rom Moscow, and lived solely on our mangled 
remains, howled around us, as if they would hasten the period 
when we were to become their prey.  
"From that day the army lost its courage and its 
military attitude. The soldier no longer obeyed his officer; the 
officer separated himself from his general; the disbanded 
regiments marched in disorder; searching for food, they spread 
themselves over the plain, pillaging whatever fell in their way. 
No sooner had the soldiers separated from the ranks, than they 
were as sailed by a population eager to avenge the horrors of 
which it had been the victim. The Cossacks came to the 
succour of the peasants, and drove back to the great road, 
already filled with the dying and the dead, those of the 
followers who escaped from the carnage made among them."  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  127 At the little town of Dorogobul, previously burnt by 
the Emperor's orders, practically no comfort could be 
obtained. "The few houses that remained," says Labaume, 
"were occupied exclusively by a small number of generals and 
staff-officers. The soldiers who yet dared to face the enemy, 
had little shelter from the rigors of the season, while the 
others, who had wandered from their proper corps, were 
repulsed on every side, and found no asylum in any part of the 
camp. How deplorable was then the situation of these poor 
wretches! Tormented by hunger, we saw them run after every 
horse the moment it fell. They devoured it raw, like dogs, and 
fought among themselves for the mangled limbs. Worn out by 
want of sleep and long marches, they s aw nothing around them 
but snow; not one spot appeared on which they could sit or lie. 
Penetrated with the cold, they wandered on every side to find 
wood, but the snow had caused it entirely to disappear; if 
perchance they found a little, they knew not whe re to light it. 
Did they discover a spot less exposed than others, it afforded 
them but a momentary shelter, for scarcely had their fire 
kindled, when the violence of the wind extinguished it, and 
deprived them of the only consolation which remained in the ir 
extreme distress. We saw crowds of them huddled together 
like beasts at the root of a beech or pine, or under a waggon. 
Others were employed in tearing huge branches from the trees, 
or pulling down by main force, and burning the houses at 
which the offi cers lodged. Although they were exhausted by 
fatigue, they stood erect; they wandered like spectres through 
the livelong night, or stood immovable around some enormous 
fire."  
Smolensk was reached on the 9th November. During 
the few days that were spent th ere the soldiers lost all idea of 
discipline and pillaged the rations, with the result that while 
some had plenty others starved. After having made his way to 
Krasnoi, largely owing to the slow advance of the enemy, 
Napoleon was joined by Eugene and Davout , and on the 19th 
the ice -bound Dnieper was crossed. Ney and the rear -guard, 
unable to come up with the Emperor in time, sustained a heavy loss. But they fought on, and when they rejoined the main 
army the corps had dwindled to such an extent that it 
numbe red but 900 men. Marching towards the Beresina river, 
Napoleon gave orders for bridges to be hastily constructed. 
Although there were frequent delays owing to breakdowns, 
many of the troops and some of the artillery passed over in 
safety. Consequently, whe n the Russians appeared they found 
the French on both banks. Victor, Oudinot, and Ney, 
recognising the extremely serious predicament in which they 
were placed, fought so determinedly that the remaining troops, 
excepting only Victor's rear -guard and some th ousands of 
undesirable camp followers, were enabled to cross the river. 
The undertaking was attended by a frightful loss of life, 
variously estimated at from 20,000 to 25,000 men. At 
Smorgoni the Emperor, filled with anxiety for the future of his 
throne an d of France, took leave of his Marshals after telling 
them that he would raise another powerful army, entered his 
travelling -carriage and was whirled away to Paris as fast as the 
horses could draw the lumbering vehicle. Twice he narrowly 
escaped assassinat ion, and the knowledge of a conspiracy 
engineered by Malet to shatter the Napoleonic dynasty, as well 
as of continued disasters in the Peninsula, did not tend to sooth 
his overwrought nerves. The mighty edifice he had erected 
seemed to be crumbling away at  the very moment when he had 
hoped to complete it.  
The remnants of the Grand Army dragged their 
flagging footsteps to Vilna, commanded, if that word may 
properly be used, by Murat. Disaster still dogged them, their 
strength grew feebler and feebler. Only 100,000 troops, chiefly 
consisting of those under Schwarzenberg and Macdonald, 
returned to their native land. Doubtless the survivors thought 
sadly of the fate of half a million comrades, some of whom 
still lived as prisoners or wanderers, while the majori ty lay 
stiff and gaunt on the plains and in the forests of victorious 
Russia, their winding -sheet the snow. At least 150,000 of the 
enemy kept them company in death. No priest gave them holy 
sepulture, but the crows cawed a funeral requiem.  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  128 CHAPTER XXXI  
THE BEGINNING OF THE END—THE LEIPZIG 
CAMPAIGN  
(1813)  
"the Colossus," said the Abbe Juda to Wellesley, "has 
feet of clay. Attack it with vigour and resolution, and it will 
fall to pieces more readily than you expect."  
In the early days of 1813 the Iron Duk e's opportunity 
for following the advice of the far -seeing Abbe was not yet 
come. Prussia, little down -trodden and despised Prussia, with a 
population of scarcely more than four and a half millions, was 
to pave the way for the liberation of Europe. When Na poleon 
had humbled the kingdom by the creation of the Confederation 
of the Rhine and fixed the Prussian army at the absurdly low 
number of 40,000 men —a mere handful compared with his 
own immense armament —he expected no further trouble from 
King Frederick W illiam III. The Emperor understood the 
character of the monarch well enough, and he knew sufficient 
of Stein's patriotic ideals to insist on his dismissal from office. 
But such a spirit as Stein's was not to be easily curbed. 
Napoleon, instead of pouring w ater on the former Minister's 
zeal had simply added fuel to the flames. Stein, free from the 
exacting cares of State, proved to be more dangerous than 
before. He and Sir Robert Wilson had fortified the failing 
courage of Alexander when Napoleon awaited the  Czar's 
peace overtures in the Kremlin; he and others now came to the 
aid of their own king, and like Aaron and Hur who held up the 
feeble arms of Moses at the battle of Rephidim, gave strength 
to the wavering faith of Frederick William III. There is much 
truth in Treitschke's statement that "Every step which has been 
taken in this (the 19th) century towards German unity, has 
been the realization of some thought of Stein's."  The conditions of life in Prussia had improved 
immensely since Jena. Before that d ecisive defeat it was a land 
of castes, just as India is to -day, and the agricultural classes 
serfs, as were the peasants of France before the Revolution. 
Civilised slavery was now abolished; there was a revival of 
learning; most important of all, for prac tical purposes at the 
moment, there was a revival of patriotism.  
Public opinion in Prussia was against Napoleon, but 
moral force alone could not prove his undoing. Fortunately the 
country possessed a military genius in Scharnhorst, who had 
caused thousand s of men to pass through the army while it still 
retained the normal strength allowed by the Emperor of the 
French. Recruits took the place of the efficient, and after 
necessary training, made way for others. This is the secret of 
the 150,000 trained men w hom the King of Prussia had at his 
call.  
An incident which did much to bring on the crisis 
which was felt to be imminent on all sides was the desertion to 
the Russians of the Prussian corps under General York. In the 
retreat from Russia, York was in comma nd of Macdonald's 
rear-guard. The Marshal, leading the centre, duly arrived at 
Tilsit, opened communications with Konigsberg, and waited 
for York. At first Macdonald thought that the Prussian General 
had met with misfortune on the road, then rumour whisper ed 
of treachery, and finally an officer who had been testing the 
ice on the river informed him that he had seen the Prussians 
rapidly recross the Niemen. "Good Heavens!" Macdonald 
exclaimed as the full force of the blow became apparent to 
him, "we are betr ayed—perhaps given up; but we will sell our 
lives dearly." His feeble forces, however, made their way 
through the dense forest of Bomwald, and after a sharp 
skirmish at Labiau, reached Konigsberg. From thence they 
marched to Elbing, crossed the frozen Vist ula, and were soon 
within sight of the fortress of Danzig. Here Macdonald handed 
over his command to General Rapp, the Governor, and shortly 
afterwards was recalled to Paris to assist in the organisation of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  129 new army corps. During an interview the Emperor f rankly 
admitted that he had been misled as to Prussia's policy, and 
that the campaign they were about to undertake would be "the 
last." "He added," says Macdonald, "that he put implicit trust 
in his father -in-law, the Emperor of Austria. 'Beware!' I 
answer ed. 'Do not trust the clever policy of that Cabinet.'" 
There was considerable justification for this remark; the 
Austrian contingents had played but a half -hearted part in the 
Russian campaign.  
 
 
 
MARSHAL  NEY DEFENDING  THE REAR -GUARD .  
What York had done was to take matters into his own 
hands and come to terms with the Russians because he feared 
for the safety of his troops. Diebitsch, the commander who 
suggested a conference, really played a very good game of 
bluff. He had told York that he was intercepted, whereas the 
Prussian forces were over seven times as strong as his own! 
However, they arranged that the district around Memel and 
Tilsit should be neutral terr itory until the Prussian monarch's 
decision should be received. "Strictly considered," says Dr J. 
Holland Rose, "this Convention was a grave breach of 
international law and an act of treachery towards Napoleon. The King at first viewed it in that light; bu t to all his subjects it 
seemed a noble and patriotic action. To continue the war with 
Russia for the benefit of Napoleon would have been an act of 
political suicide."  
By a treaty ably engineered by the sleepless Stein and 
signed on the 27th February 1813 , Prussia finally decided to 
throw down the gauntlet and join Russia against Napoleon. In 
the following June Prussia promised to raise 80,000 men for a 
subsidy of £700,000 from Great Britain, Russia supplying 
double the number of troops for £1,400,000. Eve n Sweden 
deserted the Emperor in March by agreeing to bring 30,000 
men into the field in return for a subsidy of £1,000,000 per 
annum from England and the cession of Guadaloupe. Austria, 
while still pretending to be friendly to the French cause, came 
to a secret understanding with Russia in January 1813 for the 
cessation of hostilities. Afterwards overtures for peace were 
made to Napoleon by a Congress held at Prague in July. 
"Napoleon," says Mignet, "would not consent to diminished 
grandeur; Europe would n ot consent to remain subject to him."  
When Napoleon heard of the defection of Prussia he 
muttered, "It is better to have a declared enemy than a doubtful 
ally "; as he left St Cloud at dawn on the 15th April for the 
headquarters of the army after having a ppointed the Empress 
regent during his absence, he said, according to Caulaincourt, 
"I envy the lot of the meanest peasant of my Empire. At my 
age he has discharged his debt to his country, and he may 
remain at home, enjoying the society of his wife and ch ildren; 
while I—I must fly to the camp and engage in the strife of 
war. Such is the mandate of my inexplicable Destiny."  
While the French were growing tired of the ceaseless 
struggle, they had nobly supported the Emperor in his appeal 
for soldiers to fill  the gaps in the ranks caused by the 
campaign of 1812. No fewer than 350,000 conscripts were 
voted, cities gave liberally and equipped volunteer regiments, 
the people still seemed to be fascinated by his genius and 
afraid of incurring his displeasure. But the army for the first 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  130 Saxon campaign was unlike the old army. There were too 
many youths in it, fellows brave enough no doubt but unused 
to the rough life of field and camp. Fortunately for the 
Emperor the best of his officers had survived, and although 
Murat called his brother -in-law a madman, they still believed 
in his sanity and ability. Had the King of Naples termed 
Napoleon imprudent there would have been more justification 
in his remark, for his constant warfare tended to become an 
obsession. "I grew  up in the field," he told Metternich, "and a 
man like me troubles himself little about the lives of a million 
of men." This was not the Napoleon of the Italian campaign, 
but a gambler, a man who put his trust in material forces rather 
than in carefully -chosen strategic positions, and swift, decisive 
strokes. De Fezensac had noted Napoleon's lack of care in the 
Polish campaign. "The order," he says, "must be executed 
without waiting for the means. . . . This habit of attempting 
everything with the most feeb le instruments, this wish to 
overlook impossibilities, this unbounded assurance of success, 
which at first helped to win us advantages, in the end became 
our destruction."  
At the opening of the campaign Russia and Prussia 
bore all the fighting for the all ies, their forces numbering 
133,000. Kutusoff, until his death in the early stages of the 
war, took command of the combined forces; the right wing 
being under Wittgenstein, who succeeded him; the left wing 
under Blucher. In point of numbers Napoleon was fa r ahead, 
having some 200,000 troops at his disposal, divided into the 
Army of the Elbe of 60,000, the Army of the Main of about 
105,000, and 40,000 Italians and Bavarians. The Emperor's 
first step was to occupy Leipzig, not a difficult movement 
seeing that  he had 145,000 men, while the Allies had only 
80,000 to bring to bear on any one point. The headquarters of 
the latter were at Dresden. On the 3rd May 1813, two days 
after an action at Weissenfels in which Marshal Bessieres was 
killed by a cannon -ball, th e battle of Gross -Gorschen 
(sometimes called Lutzen) was fought, the Russian and 
Prussian soldiers selling their lives dearly for the cause they had so much at heart, indeed they lost considerably less in 
killed and wounded than the enemy. There was a disp osition 
on the part of some of the French conscripts to run away at the 
first taste of real warfare, but when Napoleon approached and 
said, "Young men, I reckoned on you to save the Empire, and 
you fly!" they took heart and fought as valiantly as the 
veter ans. Both the Emperor of Russia and the King of Prussia 
watched from an adjacent hill the great sea of men contest the 
cluster of villages around which the battle centred. It was not 
until Napoleon brought up reinforcements that the fate of the 
day was dec ided in his favour, no fewer than four of the five 
villages having fallen into the hands of the Allies, who now 
retreated towards Dresden. Even then the fiery old Blucher —
he was over seventy —could not resist a cavalry charge within 
an hour of midnight.  
Sir Charles Stewart, the British Minister at the 
headquarters of Frederick William III., thus records this 
desperately contested battle, the prelude to what is usually 
called the first Saxon Campaign:  
"A very brisk cannonade commenced the action on 
both sid es. The villages of Gross and Klein Gorschen were 
soon set on fire, and taken by the Allied troops, but not 
without loss. Heavy bodies of cavalry were sent to the left to 
prevent the enemy from turning that flank; and the Allied 
troops were frequently draw n within the enemy's fire without 
producing the effect their exertions merited. The villages 
alluded to, when taken, afforded no solid advantages, as the 
enemy were equally strongly posted, barricaded, and 
entrenched in adjoining ones.  
"The cavalry of the  Allies (more especially the 
Prussians) advanced often so rapidly upon the French infantry 
that they could not get back to the strong villages from whence 
they had debouched, and they consequently received the 
charges of the enemy in squares. Great slaught er ensued, and 
the Prussian cavalry inspired their allies the Russians with the 
greatest confidence and admiration. The action continued in a 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  131 struggle for the different villages of Lutzen, the Gorschens, 
and Geras, which were taken and retaken several time s, the 
Gorschens remaining, however, always in the hands of the 
Allies. Towards the close of the day, however, a very strong 
column arrived from Leipzig, belonging to Beauharnais' corps, 
which threatened the right of the Allies, and prevented their 
making further progress. They remained on the ground they 
had so gallantly fought over, masters of the field of battle. The 
Emperor of Russia, the King of Prussia, the Princes of Prussia 
were present, animating the troops by the greatest display of 
personal exert ions and bravery.  
"The result of the battle was the capture of sixteen 
pieces of cannon, some standards, and some hundreds of 
prisoners. The battle lasted from ten o'clock in the morning till 
dark. It is very difficult to obtain any correct information as  to 
the loss of the enemy. That of the Allies may be estimated at 
about 12,000 Prussians and 3,000 Russians hors de combat . 
The main efforts in the action fell upon General Blucher's 
corps, who was himself wounded, as well as the chief of the 
Prussian E'tat Major , General Scharnhorst, the latter severely. 
(He died shortly afterwards, on the 28th June.) Many most 
distinguished officers were killed and wounded, among the 
former the Prince of Hesse -Homburg."  
As a sequel to this battle Dresden was restored to the 
King of Saxony, now only too glad to come to terms with his 
former friend after having abandoned him. Napoleon soon 
followed up the advantage he had gained by winning a second 
battle at Bautzen on the 20th and 21st May. The enemy was 
forced to retire i nto Silesia, but they did so in good order 
notwithstanding the severe fighting which continued, during 
which Duroc was mortally wounded. "Farewell, my friend," 
the Emperor said to the dying general, "we shall see each other 
again, it may be ere long!" He w as so affected by the 
distressing scene that he refused to transact any further 
military business that day. "Everything to -morrow," was the only answer he would vouchsafe to his astonished aides -de-
camp.  
An armistice was now arranged, Austria making 
furth er overtures for peace which it would have been wise for 
the Emperor to have accepted, especially as they were by no 
means so preposterous as he made them out to be. Briefly 
stated, the principal conditions were that the boundaries of the 
Empire should be fixed at the Rhine, that Germany should be 
evacuated and the title of Protector of the Confederation of the 
Rhine given up, the handing over of Hamburg, Lubeck, and 
Bremen, and the partition of unfortunate Poland once again 
between Austria, Prussia, and Ru ssia. Napoleon was scarcely 
civil to Metternich, the Austrian Minister who was charged 
with the delicate mission. "But I know what you desire in 
secret," he said in his abrupt manner. "You Austrians desire to 
get Italy entirely to yourselves; your friends the Russians 
desire Poland; the Prussians are set on Saxony; the English on 
Belgium and Holland. And if I yield to -day, you will to -
morrow demand of me those the objects of your most ardent 
desires. But before you get them, prepare to raise millions of 
men, to shed the blood of many generations, and to come to 
treat at the foot of Montmartre. Oh, Metternich, how much has 
England given you to propose such terms to me?"  
"You persist then," the Emperor concluded after a 
fierce war of words, "in bidding me def iance; you will give the 
law to me? Be it so! Let it be war, and the field of combat 
Vienna."  
As a result of the armistice Austria threw in her lot 
with Russia, Prussia, and Sweden, whose combined forces 
consequently outnumbered those marching with the Fr ench 
colours. Now began a long series of engagements in quick 
succession, the most important being the battle of Dresden 
between the troops under Napoleon and Schwarzenberg on the 
27th August, which ended in the retreat of the Allies, and the 
defeat of the  French at Kulm, where 10,000 prisoners were 
taken. After Dresden the Emperor ordered the pursuit of the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  132 dejected Russo -Prussian columns, but it was not carried out 
with sufficient energy to achieve decisive results.  
Napoleon suddenly decided to return to  Dresden, for 
what reason is unknown; some authorities aver that he was 
taken ill. It seemed as though the French had lost their 
prowess; Macdonald met with disaster, Ney failed at 
Dennewitz when victory seemed in his grasp, Reynier was 
forced to retreat, Bertrand to abandon Wartenburg. Everything 
was going from bad to worse, but it was not Napoleon himself 
who met these rebuffs it must be remembered. The Allies were 
still afraid of him.  
The Emperor now concentrated some 190,000 troops 
on Leipzig, the enem y having at their command a possible 
300,000, all of whom, however, were not available at the 
beginning of the now famous "Battle of the Nations." This 
lasted from the 16th October till the 19th, and ended in the 
defeat of Napoleon. During the four days no  fewer than 
120,000 men were killed or wounded, eloquent proof of the 
awful nature of the desperate conflict. Deserted by the Saxons, 
Wurtembergers and Bavarians, Napoleon fought his way to the 
Rhine, crossed the river, and leaving his army, now reduced to  
about 70,000 men, arrived in Paris on the 9th November. "The 
close of the campaign," said Mignet, "was as disastrous as that 
of the preceding one. France was threatened in its own limits, 
as it had been in 1799; but the enthusiasm of independence no 
longe r existed, and the man who deprived it of its rights found 
it, at this great crisis, incapable of sustaining him or defending 
itself. The servitude of nations is, sooner or later, ever 
avenged." The concluding sentence sums up the whole 
philosophy of histo ry.  CHAPTER XXXII  
THE CONQUEST OF THE CONQUEROR  
(1814 -1815)  
The Allies now had the upper hand beyond the shadow 
of a doubt. Napoleon the Conqueror —for he has surely as 
much right to that title as William of Normandy —who had 
used the greater part of Europ e as a parade ground for his 
matchless legions, who had overturned thrones and founded a 
dynasty in the modern nineteenth century, had been defeated 
in two great campaigns. It is difficult to realise that he was 
now only forty -four years of age, in the pri me of life, but "One 
grows old quickly on battlefields," as he once remarked. His 
astounding energy, physically if not mentally, was wearing 
out. Superactivity is a consuming fire.  
Although the Allies had brought the Emperor to his 
knees, or almost so, th ere was considerable difference of 
opinion among them as to their next step. He had lost much; 
the Confederacy of the Rhine was shattered, the greater part of 
Germany was unshackled, disasters had occurred in Italy, the 
British were masters of the Peninsul a, yet his enemies wanted 
more. The Czar and England were the most determined; 
Prussia, Sweden and Austria were lukewarm. They eventually 
agreed to give the Emperor another chance, to offer terms 
humiliating without doubt, but affording him an opportunity of 
restoring peace to Europe, a blessing long desired but now 
absolutely necessary.  
The boundaries of France were to be the Rhine, the 
Pyrenees, and the Alps. He could accept them or choose the 
only alternative —war. The proud nature of the man, the 
memory  of former conquests, more especially of the time 
when Alexander and Frederick William III. had been as so 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  133 much clay in his hands, made a negative answer practically 
certain, and accordingly the terms of the Allies were refused.  
 
 
A H UNDRED  DAYS—1814  
France was all but exhausted; Napoleon could raise not 
more than 200,000 troops against the 620,000 men who were 
with the Allies. Still, he argued, it was worth the risk. The 
brilliant, dashing days when he could take the offensive were 
gone, and in its turn Paris was the objective of the enemy. On 
the 29th January 1814, four days after he had left the capital, 
Napoleon attacked and defeated Blucher at Brienne; at La Rothiere on the 1st February, Blucher having received 
reinforcements, the reverse was the case, the Emperor losing 
several thousand men. There was again an offer of peace, more 
humiliating than before, which met with no more favourable 
response. On the 10t h February the Emperor was victorious at 
Braye, on the 11th at Montmirail, on the 12th at Chateau -
Thierry, on the 13th at Vauchamp.  
It was but the final glory of the sun as it sinks below 
the horizon. In the middle of the following month Wellington, 
havin g compelled the French to retire from the Peninsula, after 
an extremely arduous campaign, crossed the Pyrenees and 
occupied Bordeaux, while Napoleon fought desperately at 
Craonne and Laon without decisive result, Marmont's corps 
sustaining heavy losses. Th e Emperor now turned his attention 
to the main army under Schwarzenberg, but was obliged to fall 
back upon St Dizier. Meanwhile Marmont and Mortier were 
taking measures for the defence of Paris, upon which the 
Allies were marching.  
The Marshals did their best but were overwhelmed, 
and eventually, acting on the advice of Napoleon's brothers, 
Joseph and Jerome, arranged an armistice. Paris, the scene of 
so much splendour and glory under the Imperial regime , 
capitulated. The Emperor, marching to the relief of  the capital 
when it was too late, heard the awful news from some 
straggling soldiers at a post -house while his carriage -horses 
were being changed. "These men are mad!" cried the Emperor, 
"the thing is impossible." When he found that the 
announcement was o nly too true, large beads of perspiration 
stood out on his forehead. "He turned to Caulaincourt," writes 
Macdonald, "and said, 'Do you hear that?' with a fixed gaze 
that made him shudder."  
Napoleon retired to Fontainebleau and discussed the 
terrible situa tion with Oudinot, Maret, Caulaincourt, Ney, 
Macdonald, Berthier, Lefebvre and others. He asked 
Macdonald what opinions were held by his soldiers as to the 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  134 surrender of Paris, and whether they would be willing to make 
an attempt to regain the city.  
 
 
 
THE RETURN  FROM  ELBA.  
"They share our grief," the Marshal replied, "and I 
come now to declare to you that they will not expose Paris to 
the fate of Moscow. We think we have done enough, have 
given sufficient proof of our earnest desire to save France 
from the calamities that are now crowding upon her, without 
risking an attempt which would be more than unequal, and 
which can only end in losing everything. The troops a re dying 
of hunger in the midst of their own country, reduced in number though they are by the disastrous events of the 
campaign, by privation, sickness, and, I must add, by 
discouragement. Since the occupation of the capital a large 
number of soldiers hav e retired to their own homes, and the 
remainder cannot find enough to live upon in the forest of 
Fontainebleau. If they advance they will find themselves in an 
open plain; our cavalry is weakened and exhausted; our horses 
can go no farther; we Have not eno ugh ammunition for one 
skirmish, and no means of procuring more. If we fail, 
moreover, as we most probably shall, what remains of us will 
be destroyed, and the whole of France will be at the mercy of 
the enemy. We can still impose upon them; let us retain our 
attitude. Our mind is made up; whatever decision is arrived at, 
we are determined to have no more to do with it. For my own 
part, I declare to you that my sword shall never be drawn 
against Frenchmen, nor dyed with French blood. Whatever 
may be decided  upon, we have had enough of this unlucky war 
without kindling civil war."  
The Emperor was quite calm; he met his defeat with 
less apparent concern than in the old days when a minor error 
had instantly provoked a violent outburst of temper. Taking up 
a pen he wrote an offer of abdication on behalf of his son. 
Again and again he endeavoured to win his old comrades -in-
arms to his side ere he realised that the game was up. On the 
11th April 1814, he signed his own dismissal, making no 
conditions, surrendering  everything.  
"The Allied Powers," he wrote, "having declared that 
the Emperor was the sole obstacle to the re -establishment of 
peace in Europe, the Emperor, faithful to his oaths, declares 
that he renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of 
Franc e and Italy, and that there is no sacrifice, not even that of 
life, which he is not ready to make for the interest of France."  
With mock generosity the Allies gave the former 
Emperor of the West the tiny island of Elba as his future 
kingdom, an army of 40 0 men, and an income of 2,000,000 
francs a year —which was never paid. The Empress and her 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  135 son were granted the duchies of Parma, Placentia and 
Guastalla and an ample subsidy, and the remaining members 
of the Bonaparte family had no reason to complain of th eir 
treatment.  
Napoleon's activity in his miniature possession, which 
is 17i miles wide and 12 miles from North to South, has been 
likened to a bluebottle under a glass tumbler. He certainly 
imported considerable energy into his administration, erected 
fortifications, built roads, created a make -believe navy, and 
annexed the adjacent island of Palmaiola. It was all useful dust 
to throw into the eyes of those who watched. On the 29th April 
1814, Napoleon had set sail for Elba in the Undaunted , a 
British ves sel commanded by Captain Ussher; less than a year 
later, on the 26th February 1815, he stepped on board the 
French brig Inconstant   for his last desperate adventure. With 
1050 troops he had decided to invade France, to "reach Paris 
without firing a shot."  
He had chosen a favourable time for putting into action 
the scheme on which he had been secretly brooding. The 
Allies still quarrelled amongst themselves, the Czar in 
particular showing a disposition towards the others more 
warlike than pacific; some 300, 000 troops had been released 
from German fortresses, Spanish prisons, and British hulks, 
and might rally around him; the Bourbons, who had been 
replaced in power, were anything but popular, and people were 
beginning to talk about "the good old times" when the 
insatiable French appetite for glory had been appeased. On the 
first day of March the Commander and his little army landed 
near Cannes and pushed on to Grenoble as quickly as possible. 
The garrison did not seem particularly anxious to listen to his 
overtures. Unbuttoning his coat he declaimed to the soldiers, 
"Here is your Emperor; if any one would kill him, let him 
fire!" This dramatic appeal was irresistible. The detachment 
instantly joined him, followed by many others as he marched 
in the direction o f Paris. Peasants who would have heard with 
unfeigned delight of his assassination ten months before, now saluted and cheered him as he rode at the head of his rapidly 
increasing army, which included Ney and the 6000 soldiers 
who had been sent to capture h im. The new king deemed it 
advisable to leave Paris; on the following day Napoleon 
entered it and was again in the Tuileries. Without losing a 
moment he began to re -construct the Government. Great 
Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia, declared him an outl aw, 
a step less serious than their agreement to keep 600,000 troops 
under arms "till Bonaparte should have been rendered 
absolutely incapable of stirring up further troubles." At the 
commencement of hostilities the Emperor had 125,000 men, 
the Allies 210,0 00.  
Of Napoleon's campaign in Belgium little need be said. 
It was short and it was decisive. On the 16th June 1815, he 
won his last victory at Ligny, where he defeated the Prussians 
under Blucher, Wellington gaining the battle of Quatre Bras 
against Ney. Two days later Wellington and Blucher routed 
the French on the field of Waterloo. The Iron Duke afterwards 
told Thomas Creevey that it was "the nearest run thing you 
ever saw in your life."  
"On the morning of the 18th," relates Sir Hussey 
Vivian, who led a British brigade, "about eleven o'clock, our 
advanced posts were driven in, and we saw the enemy's 
column advancing to attack us.  
"The firing soon began, and about one o'clock one of 
the most desperate attacks I ever witnessed was made on the 
centre and left centre of our line; this was defeated, and 
repeated twice, the armies constantly mixed actually with each 
other, and the French always covering each attack by the most 
tremendous cannonade you can possibly imagine. With respect 
to the particular situa tion in which my brigade was placed, it 
did not suffer much until towards the last attack; the ground on 
the left did not admit of the cavalry advancing, and I, being on 
the left of all, consequently suffered only from the cannonade. 
About six o'clock, how ever, I learnt that the cavalry in the 
centre had suffered dreadfully, and the Prussians about that 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  136 time having formed to my left, I took upon myself to move off 
from our left, and halted directly to the centre of our line, 
where I arrived most opportunely  at the instant that Bonaparte 
was making his last and most desperate effort. And never did I 
witness anything so terrific: the ground actually covered with 
dead and dying, cannon shot and shells flying thicker than I 
ever heard musquetry.  
 
 
 
THE FLIGHT  FROM  WATERLOO .  
"In this state of affairs I wheeled my brigade into line 
close (within ten yards) in the rear of our infantry, and 
prepared to charge the instant t hey had retreated through my 
intervals (the three squadron officers were wounded at this 
instant). This, however, gave them confidence, and the 
brigades that were literally running away halted on our 
cheering them and again began fighting. The enemy on the ir 
part began to waver. The Duke observed it, and ordered the 
infantry to advance. I immediately wheeled the brigade by 
half-squadrons to the right and in column over the dead and 
dying, trotted round the right of our infantry, passed the 
French infantry, and formed lines of regiments on the first half-squadrons. With the 10th I charged a body of French 
Cuirassiers and Lancers infinitely superior to them, and 
completely routed them. I then went to the 18th, and charged a 
second body that was supporting a sq uare of Imperial Guards, 
and the 18th not only defeated them, but took fourteen pieces 
of cannon that had been firing grape at us during our 
movement. I then, with the 10th, having reformed them, 
charged a square of infantry, Imperial Guards, the men of 
which we cut down in the ranks, and here the last shot was 
fired—from this moment all was de -route. . . . I never saw 
such a day, nor any one else."  
In confirmation of the last statement Sir Harry Smith, 
who also fought under Wellington in this campaign, sa ys "I 
had never seen anything to be compared with what I saw," 
excepting only "one spot at New Orleans, and the breach of 
Badajos." He adds a description of the field as he observed it 
on the following day: —  
"At Waterloo," he writes, "the whole field from  right to 
left was a mass of dead bodies. In one spot, to the right of La 
Haye Sainte, the French Cuirassiers were literally piled on 
each other; many soldiers not wounded lying under their 
horses; others, fearfully wounded, occasionally with their 
horses struggling upon their wounded bodies. The sight was 
sickening, and I had no means or power to assist them. 
Imperative duty compelled me to the field of my comrades, 
where I had plenty to do to assist many who had been left out 
all night; some had been beli eved to be dead, but the spark of 
life had returned. All over the field you saw officers, and as 
many soldiers as were permitted to leave the ranks, leaning 
and weeping over some dead or dying brother or comrade. The 
battle was fought on a Sunday, the 18th  June, and I repeated to 
myself a verse from the Psalms of that day —91st Psalm, 7th 
verse: 'A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy 
right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee.' I blessed Almighty 
God our Duke was spared, and galloped to  my General, whom 
I found with some breakfast awaiting my arrival." In Sir 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  137 Harry's opinion "Napoleon fought the battle badly, his attacks 
were not simultaneous, but partial and isolated, and enabled 
the Duke to repel each by a concentration."  
 
A fleeting glimpse of the fallen Colossus as he rushes 
towards Paris is afforded us by Alexandre Dumas, then staying 
with his mother at the posting -house of Villers -Cotterets, 
about fifty -five miles from the capital. The novelist had seen 
the Emperor pass through the  little town before the crushing 
conflict. He had then been accompanied by General Letort and 
Jerome Bonaparte. Says Dumas:  
"At seven o'clock a courier arrived; he was covered 
with mud, his horse shook from head to foot, and was ready to 
drop with fatigue . He ordered four horses to be ready for a 
carriage which was following him, then he leapt on his horse 
and set off on his journey again.  
"It was in vain we questioned him; he either knew 
nothing or would not say anything.  
"The four horses were taken out  of the stables and 
harnessed in readiness for the carriage: a rapidly approaching 
heavy rumble announced it was coming, soon we saw it appear 
round the corner of the street and draw up at the door.  
"The master of the post came forward and stood 
stupefied . I took hold of his coat tails and asked: 'It is he? the 
Emperor? '  
'Yes.'  
"It was indeed the Emperor, just in the same place and 
carriage, with one aide -de-camp near him and one opposite 
him, as I had seen him before. But his companions were 
neither Je rome nor Letort. Letort was killed, and Jerome was 
commissioned to rally the army by Laon.  "It was just the same man, it was just the same pale, 
sickly, impassive face, but his head was bent a little more 
forward on his chest.  
"Was it merely from fatigue , or from grief at having 
staked the world and lost it?  
"As on the first occasion, he raised his head when he 
felt the carriage pull up, and threw exactly the same vague 
look around him which became so penetrating when he fixed it 
upon a person or scanned  the horizon, those two unknown 
elements behind which danger might always lurk.  
"'Where are we?' he asked.  
"'At Villiers -Cotterets, sire.'  
"'Good! eighteen leagues from Paris?'  
"'Yes, sire.'  
"'Go on.'"  
In his second abdication, signed on the 22nd Jun e, the 
Emperor declared that his public life was finished, and 
proclaimed his son as Napoleon II., Emperor of the French. 
But the child for whom his father had anticipated so glorious a 
career in 1811, who had been born with the mighty title of 
King of Rom e, was never destined to wear the crown of 
France. That insignia of royal rank was donned once more by 
Louis XVIII.  
The mighty conqueror had run his course. He threw 
himself on the mercy of the nation to which he had shown no 
mercy, and which he had hated  with exceeding hatred. Great 
Britain consigned him to the island rock of St Helena, far 
away on the broad bosom of the Atlantic, and in the well -
known picture by the late Sir W. Q. Orchardson, Napoleon on 
the Bellerophon , we see Napoleon taking his final farewell of 
France. He stands alone, bearing, in place of the weight of 
Empire, the almost insupportable burden of shattered hopes. 
Gone dynasty and throne and kindred, everything that was 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  138 worth while in his complex life, but the Imperial Dignity will 
neve r be discarded. He remains Napoleon the Great. The 
rigidity of the mouth and the stern and unbending demeanour 
tell you that the will is still unconquered.  
 
 
 
NAPOLEON  ON BOARD  THE BELLEROPHON .  
Although Orchardson's picture only dates from 1880, 
the central figure of his dramatic canvas represents the 
conventional conception of what Napoleon was like. There is 
no portrait of the Emperor that we can say with certa inty 
exactly delineates his features. He granted no sittings, and 
even David, his premier Peintre, had to make his preliminary 
studies without them. The death -mask taken by Dr Francis 
Burton shows a face of singular refinement, the forehead not 
unusually b road, and the chin by no means aggressive. The 
massive head is a myth.  CHAPTER XXXIII  
THE PRISONER OF EUROPE  
(1815—1821)  
Napoleon's "star" had led him far from insignificant 
Ajaccio, and was now leading him still further. Unknown lad, 
cadet, lieutenant, general, emperor, constructor, destructor, 
reconstructor, he had been all, and more. Destiny had now set 
him an even more difficult task —to reign over himself.  
In lonely St Helena, isolated from other human 
habitation, spied on by soldiers of the army whi ch had done so 
much to bring about his downfall, guarded by British bayonets 
and frigates, but surrounded by a little band of men and 
women who refused to desert him in his last days of trial and 
despair, the exile spent the remainder of a life which had b een 
lived to the full. He to whom Time had been a priceless 
possession had to confess that it was now "his only 
superfluity."  
Napoleon was already a broken man. The strange 
lassitude which characterised his behaviour during the Hunch 
e '. Days and at Wate rloo became a habit. The volcano was 
extinct. He who had despised bed learned to love it, though he 
often spent many wakeful hours during the night. Bereft of 
hope, there was a gradual dimming of the lamp of life as the 
Dictator of yesteryear eked out a mi serable existence in damp, 
windswept, rat -ridden Longwood. Sometimes his old 
enthusiasm would revive as he reviewed the history of a 
campaign; at others his usual stoical attitude would give way 
to capriciousness at the over -conscientious sense of duty 
displayed by Sir Hudson Lowe, the Irish Governor of the 
island, and occasionally he would burst into fits of 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  139 uncontrollable anger. Now and then his conversations were 
contradictory; what he said to -day he denied to -morrow.  
He reviews the careers and characte rs of his marshals, 
discusses science, religion, finance, the creation of man, his 
Code, the English, his family tree, his love affairs. He points 
out what he believes to have been errors of policy, is not afraid 
to admit that he made blunders, and suffers  his courtiers to 
argue and disagree with him. His hero is Alexander the Great, 
and time after time he regrets that he did not become Emperor 
of the East. He turns his thoughts to the might -have -beens of 
his career, possibilities marred by the "if only —" of more 
ordinary humanity, and sums up with, "After all, I am only a 
man."  
We who know the Great War in history, and the 
Greater War of 1911 –18 in reality, will appreciate Napoleon's 
remark that "Prussia has always been since the time of 
Frederick, and wil l always be, the greatest obstacle to my 
projects for France." Of topical interest is his prophecy anent 
Russia, "The Power that marches the most surely and with the 
greatest strides towards universal dominion." To a weary 
world urged to increase productio n these words echo down the 
century, "We want cultivators, workmen, manufacturers, not 
philosophers." Again, "The men who have changed the 
universe have never succeeded by capturing the leaders, but 
always by moving the masses." Sometimes Napoleon busies 
himself with dictating to Las Cases, Montholon, or Gourgaud. 
It helped to relieve the drab monotony. He criticizes Caesar, 
Turenne, and Frederick the Great. For a moment he 
contemplates writing the campaigns of Moses, the "one able 
man" of the Old Testament . Books on the Russian expedition 
and the Revolutionary Convention begin and end with the 
idea. He peruses the Bible with avidity, but one is led to 
believe that he held a brief for Mohammedanism, though it 
may well be that in theological matters he took a n opposite 
view from those with whom he was discussing the subject in 
order to stimulate argument.  Always an omnivorous reader, his literature included 
Richardson's Clarissa Marlowe, Hume's History of England, 
the Arabian Nights, Paradise Lost, Homer, Vir gil, and his 
beloved Ossian.  
That Napoleon in some of his dictations and 
conversation had an eye for the future can scarcely be 
gainsaid. There was a remote chance of political action in 
England in his favour, of reaction in France against Louis 
XVIII., a nd there was always his son, the uncrowned 
Napoleon II. In his Journal Las Cases penned, but refrained 
from publishing, a highly significant passage which sheds a 
certain amount of light on the interminable wrangle between 
"General Buonaparte" and Lowe. "W e are possessed of moral 
arms only," he notes; "and in order to make the most 
advantageous use of these it was necessary to reduce into a 
system our demeanour, our words, our sentiments, even our 
privations, in order that we might thereby excite a lively 
interest in a large portion of the population of Europe, and that 
the Opposition in England might not fail to attack the Ministry 
on the violence of their conduct towards us." La politique de 
Longwood certainly existed —Napoleon III. made good use of 
it and became Emperor of the French on the forty -seventh 
anniversary of Austerlitz —but so did the tragedy of St Helena. 
Of the two martyrs, the one to failure and the other to duty, it 
is difficult to say who suffered more. The prisoner did not love 
his gaoler, a nd the latter was certainly not enamoured of the 
former. Suspicion blinded both.  
It was only natural that Napoleon should frequently 
remark on England. He even went so far as to study the 
intricacies of the language, with what success may best be 
apprecia ted by reproducing a note he wrote to Las Cases:  
"Since sixt week y learn the English and y do not any 
progress. Sixt week do fourty and two day. If might have learn 
fivty word, for day, i could know it two thousands and two 
hundred. It is in the dictiona ry more of fourty thousand: even 
he could most twenty; bot much of tems. For know it or 
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  140 hundred and twenty week, which do more two years. After this 
you shall agree that the study one tongue is a great labour who 
it must do into the young aged."  
The reclu se reads aloud, or is read to and falls asleep. 
Chess and billiards help to while away the long evenings. A 
year or two before he died he renewed his interest in outdoor 
life, and for a time showed feverish enthusiasm for gardening, 
occasionally varied by horse -riding. His retinue was 
compelled to dig trenches and to listen to lectures on warfare.  
Three Commissioners —Montehenu, Stunner, and 
Balmain, representing France, Austria, and Russia 
respectively —were sent to St Helena. Their special task was to 
"assure themselves of his [Napoleon's] presence." They seem 
to have spent a considerable part of their time in quarrelling 
with Lowe and in endeavouring to see the Emperor face to 
face instead of at a humiliating distance. Once he afforded 
them an opportunity of meeting him by asking them to 
luncheon, though it was made quite clear that they were not to 
come as officials. As they did not see fit to accept because 
they would have to leave their rank on the doorstep, none of 
them ever uttered so much as a single syllable to him. For 
fairly obvious reasons Napoleon was specially vitriolic 
towards Montehenu, the French Commissioner, whom he 
stigmatized as "an old fool, a chatterbox, a carriage general 
who has never smelt powder."  
At first Napoleon was allowed a twe lve-mile radius for 
the purpose of exercise, subsequently curtailed in the autumn 
of 1816 to eight miles. Longwood itself could only be 
approached by a narrow path across a ravine, yet soldiers were 
always on guard, and at night a small army of sentries wa s 
posted near the exile's house. Semaphore apparatus was 
stationed on every hill -top. No private merchantman was 
allowed to anchor; that privilege was reserved exclusively for 
ships of the Navy and Indiamen. In August 1819, when 
Napoleon was invisible beca use he remained indoors, Lowe 
informed his prisoner that the orderly officer was to see him every day, by force if necessary. As Napoleon threatened to 
shoot the first man who carried out this instruction, it was 
withdrawn.  
 
 
 
NAPOLEON  AT ST. HELENA .  
Original Copyright 1911  by Harold Wheeler .   Distributed by Heritage Hi story 2010  141 A characteristic of Napoleon was his unexpected 
questions. While driving at Longwood with Dr William 
Warden, he put this poser: "In the course of your practice, and 
on your conscience, how many patients have you killed?" On 
another occasion he mentioned that he had "adopted, 
encouraged, and indeed decreed the rigid observance of Dr 
Jenner's system" of inoculation against smallpox, and asked 
whether the people of Englan d had given him some credit for 
it. When Antommarchi, an expert anatomist, arrived to fill the 
post of physician to the Emperor, the patient tested his 
knowledge of chemistry, and later remarked, "I would give 
him my horse to dissect, but I would not trust  him with the 
cure of my own foot."  
The presence of Captain Poppleton, who was the first 
orderly officer at Longwood, and held that post from 
December 1815 to July 1817, was certainly not resented by the 
Emperor, who made a most favourable impression on t he 
soldier.  
"After Admiral Sir G. Cockburn left us," Poppleton 
confides to a correspondent, "fresh restrictions were placed 
upon him [Napoleon]; from this period he never quitted 
Longwood —for many weeks he never quitted his room —
within a very short period  only he has quitted the house for a 
walk in the garden. He bears his confinement most heroically . 
. . and is always happy to get hold of any book that abuses 
him, even in the most gross language. Many people call him 
sulky—what he was formerly I know not , but since I have 
known him he does not deserve such an appellation —very few 
would have borne so sudden a change of fortune with the 
stoicism he has. His officers were always full of complaints 
and never pleased —from him no complaints ever come, 
except re garding the restrictions which deprived him of the 
exercise he was accustomed to and injured his health."  
The last phase of Napoleon's career was perhaps a 
more dramatic ending to so marvellous a story than if he had 
fallen in battle. Many men have met th eir death in that way, but there has been but one Imperial prisoner at St Helena, the 
exiled monarch whose soul took flight at 5.49 p.m. on the 5th 
May 1821. His age was fifty -one years.  
"I desire that my ashes may repose on the banks of the 
Seine, in the  midst of the French people I have loved so well," 
wrote Napoleon in his will, and the nation responded with 
emotion to the wish of its great Son. They forgot that he had 
lavished French treasure and resources as a spendthrift, that 
his insane ambitions ha d brought them financial and political 
ruin; they forgave him that he had led the youth of France to 
the shambles and had bereaved their homes of fathers, of 
husbands, of brothers, of sons. They remembered only that he 
had glorified France, and in the mids t of beautiful Paris they 
raised the most noble Tomb that the genius of modern times 
has conceived. It is a sacred place of pilgrimage to every son 
and daughter of France, and men and women of other nations 
pass, a continual stream, before the massive sarc ophagus 
which—oh, irony of fate! —was hewn out of a Russian quarry, 
the memorial tribute of Czar Nicholas I. to his brother's mighty 
antagonist. None who enters that quiet place fails to bow the 
head before those ashes, and we too, perhaps from afar, may 
reflect one moment upon the vanity of human glory and 
ponder the eternal truth:  
Only the actions of the just  
Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust.  
